THE GREAT ESCAPE

Background

Investigating rumors of goblin raids in the vicinity of Luln, the party’s camp is surprised one night by a horde of goblins (arranged by Anton if he is there). Tell the players as DM that their characters will probably die if they resist, and kill characters whose players force the issue. (This is something of an intelligence test, unintelligent play will cost a character at this point. Obviously, characters who surrender should not be killed). If Anton is there, he will gloat about having caught agents of the Duke. The characters will be force marched several days to an outpost of the Barony.

If the players complain that their capture was unfair, gently remind them that if adventuring was easy, anyone could do it—they can’t always expect things to go their way— and that there were clues. They will have ample opportunity to escape and recover their equipment, if they play well.

Notes for the Dungeon Master

The party members start this adventure with no armor or weapons. The spell books of any magic users have been taken away. However, all spell casters in the party have memorized spells, and can cast them normally. All obvious magic items have been removed from all characters. There is a 20% chance that small, inobvious magic items (such as rings) may have been missed when the enemy soldiers searched their prisoners.

Once the characters have escaped their cell, they can search for their equipment (stored in room 13) or attempt an immediate escape. If they escape without recovering their equipment, and make it back to Luln, the townmistress Sascia will equip the party with non-magical weapons and armor (and possibly a few scroll spells for magic users) so they can go back and clear out the enemy outpost. They can then recover their equipment. If this occurs, replace all the men and monsters that the party killed during their escape. The entire outpost will be on alert when the party returns, and surprise will be impossible. This has no great campaign effect; border skirmishes are common.

Rooms that are empty or in which someone is sleeping are considered dark unless the room has windows or the text specifically states the room is lit. Rooms that are occupied by people who are awake always have light, either through a window or by a candle or lantern. Doors are not locked unless the text specifically says otherwise, and open easily.

The occupants of the outpost are intelligent soldiers. They work together, and once the alarm is raised or the escaping prisoners are sighted, they pursue the party in the most efficient way possible.

Remember, the players cannot map the outpost until (or unless) their characters find mapping implements and supplies.

The corridors and hallways of the outpost will be empty for exactly 10 turns after the party escapes from room 1. After that, the men and women currently eating a meal in room 2 leave the dining room by ones and twos, with one group leaving every other turn. There is a 1 in 6 chance each turn that the party will have an encounter with 1 or 2 veterans (F1, AC 9, hp 7 each, dagger D 1-4, ML 8). The veterans will attempt to sound the alarm if they get initiative and are not surprised. If the alarm is raised, the chance for an encounter increases to 3 in 6 each turn. If the party is already engaged in combat, there is a 1 in 6 chance each melee round that 1 additional veteran arrives to join the fight. Monster statistics are given on page 28.

1. PRISON CELL

The flickering torchlight barely illuminates the prison cell that you have occupied for the past two days. Talking quietly amongst yourselves, you have pooled a pitifully scant amount of information about your plight. You were captured by goblins and brought to this outpost, somewhere just beyond the Black Eagle border. You were blindfolded, herded through corridors and finally shackled in leg irons in this narrow cell.

It is important that you escape, and quickly. You have learned that a large raiding force of goblins, backed by the Black Eagle Barony, will soon descend on Luln. The town must be warned.

Once you were securely shackled, your blindfolds were removed, and you could see your surroundings. Your prison cell is about 20 feet wide and 80 feet long. Iron double doors, securely locked, are along one of the long walls. The leg irons are attached to each other with a sturdy chain, about five feet long. The chain passes through a ring that is securely embedded in the floor of the cell, The torches that light the room are in brackets high on the wall—too high for you to reach.

You have heard human voices from time to time, but until this morning, the only creature you have seen is a large humanoid who bears a strong resemblence to a hyena. He has brought you food and water three times each day. He is armed with a dagger and a mace, and carries a large key ring with several keys on it. He has muttered and complained in the common tongue because the commander has not let him torture you.

This morning, the human commander of the outpost and a visitor, a female officer from another Black Eagle unit, came into your cell and bragged about the trusted Black Eagle agent, Anton Turino, having captured you. He told the visitor that instead of being slain as spies, you are about to be taken to the slave markets of Fort Doom, There, you will have no hope of escape.

If you are ever to see your home again, you must act soon. Soon, it will be time for your noon meal...

Give the players up to 10 minutes of real time to create a plan. If they decide on a plan in less than 10 minutes, the jailer arrives as soon as the plan is set. If the players have not finished their planning when their time is up, the jailer attives anyway. When the jailer is about to enter the room, read the following:

You hear heavy footsteps approach, and the sound of a key turning in the door. It is your jailer, coming with your noon meal. He enters alone, grumbling about something under his breath. He appears distracted.

The jailer is a gnoll armed with a dagger and a mace. It carries a key ring with six keys on it. Only two are used in this adventure: one unlocks all the leg irons, and the other opens the prison door.

The gnoll is not particularly bright, and will go along with any reasonably subtle trick, such as feigned illness on the part of a party member. If captured and threatened, it will cooperate with the party, but will look for the first opportunity to doublecross them. It knows the party’s equipment is in room 13, but does not have a key to that room.

In order to give the party a fighting chance, the first magic spell that any party member casts in this adventure automatically succeeds, even if the victim is entitled to a saving throw. This benefit only happens once for the entire party.

If the party’s plan does not succeed, the jailer leaves, taking the noon meal with him. He does not report the escape attempt because he doesn’t want to look bad. He returns with the evening meal, this time very alert.

If the party does not escape within two days (six meals), a party of armed human guards escorts them out of their cell, and they are taken (in leg irons) to the Fort Doom.

Any further escape attempt are at the discretion of the DM (remember that magic users cannot re-learn spells without a spell book). One possible rescue is given at the end of this adventure in Interlude C.

If the party escapes the room, read the following aloud:

As you carefully peer out the door of your cell, you see a corridor stretching to the left and right. You hear the sounds of conversation and laughter coming from the left. In both directions you see branching corridors and several doors.

2. KITCHEN AND COMMON DINING ROOM

NOTE: There are two openings (no doors) leading into the dining room, and one door (closed) leading into the kitchen. If the party peers through either door into the dining room, read the following:

You see a large room with many tables and benches. About 20 people are sitting at the tables; they are laughing, talking, and eating. Both women and men are present; all are dressed in leather armor and seem to be soldiers. There is an open kitchen in one section of the room; a door leads out of the kitchen.

If the party opens the door into the kitchen, read the following:

An open kitchen reveals a dining room beyond, filled with people. Two women are preparing and serving a meal. A delicious aroma of cooking meat comes from the kitchen.

The two women in the kitchen and ten of the people seated at the table are non-combatant servants. The rest are fighters wearing leather armor and armed with daggers.

There are 6 male servants, 6 female servants, 8 veteran fighters (1st level fighters), and 2 warriors (2nd level fighters). Two of the veterans are women. Each of the warriors has a key to the armory (room 13).

3. MEN’S COMMON QUARTERS

This room contains a number of beds and wardrobes, a few chairs, and a couple of tables. It otherwise appears to be empty. There is an open doorway on the far side of the room.

This room provides quarters for the male servants. There is no one here at the moment. Under one mattress can be found 12 sp and 14 cp. Under a second matress can be found 6 sp and 15 cp. A third mattress conceals 8 sp and 6 cp. A fourth holds 3 sp and 19 cp.

4. MEN’S BATH

This long, narrow room has an open doorway at the far end. There are several wooden tubs on the floor, and what looks like a stove in the middle of the room. The floor is wet, and there is a soap smell. The room appears to be empty.

This room is a bath. The stove is used to heat water for the tubs. The room is currently empty. The floor is very slippery; any character searching here must roll his Dexterity or less, using 3d6, or slip on the floor and turn an ankle. A turned ankle cuts a character’s movement rate by half for 1d6 turns.

5. MEN’S DRESSING ROOM

NOTE; The following description assumes the party enters this room from the east. If they enter from room 6, you must make the appropriate adjustments. The small entranceway to the east of this room is currently empty. Both doors are swinging doors, and can easily be pushed open.

The left wall of this long, narrow room seems to be a curtain. The right wall is lined with pegs. One of the pegs has some clothing on it. There is a basket near the far end of the room that has some cloth things on it. Otherwise, the room appears to be empty.

This area is used by the men to change clothes before using the bath or the exercise room (room 6). The curtain has several gaps through which one can enter room 6. The clothing belongs to the man in room 6, and includes leather armor and a belt with a dagger. The basket is filled with wet towels.

6. MEN’S EXERCISE ROOM

NOTE: The following description assumes the party enters this room from the south. If they come from room 5, make the appropriate adjustments.

This looks like a work-out room. There are mats on the floor, weights, and other equipment. A man dressed only in short pants is doing push-ups near a rack in the near left corner of the room.

This man is a veteran (1st level fighter). He is AC 8 because of good dexterity. When he sees the party, he grabs a weight from the rack and uses it like a mace (D 2-7, due to strength). He is too far from the dining room to call to the others, but he fights as best he can. He runs to alert the others if he can.

There is nothing of value in this room. If party members choose, they can use the weights as maces, but they are — 1 to hit rolls and to damage when using them.

7. WOMEN’S COMMON QUARTERS

This room contains a number of beds and wardrobes, a few chairs, and a couple of tables. It otherwise appears to be empty. There is an open doorway on the far side of the room.

This room provides quarters for the female servants. There is no one here at the moment. Under one mattress can be found 7 sp and 5 cp. Under a second mattress can be found 8 sp and 20 cp.

8. WOMEN’S BATH

This long, narrow room has an open doorway at the far end. There are several wooden tubs on the floor, and what looks like a stove in the middle of the room. The floor is wet, and there is a soap smell. The room appears to be empty.

This room is a bath. The stove is used to heat water for the tubs. The room is currently empty. The floor is very slippery; any character searching here must roll his Dexterity or less, using 3d6, or slip on the floor and turn an ankle. A turned ankle cuts a character’s movement rate by half for 1d6 turns.

9. WOMEN’S DRESSING ROOM

NOTE: The following description assumes the party enters this room from the east. If they enter from room 10, you must make the appropriate adjustments. The small entranceway to the east of this room is currently empty. Both doors are swinging doors, and can easily be pushed open.

The left wall of this long, narrow room seems to be a curtain. The right wall is lined with pegs. There is a basket near the far end of the room that has some cloth things on it. Otherwise, the room appears to be empty.

This area is used by the women to change clothes before using the bath or the exercise room (room 10). The curtain has several gaps through which one can enter room 10. The basket is filled with wet towels.

10. WOMEN’S EXERCISE ROOM

NOTE: The following description assumes the party enters this room from the north. If they come from room 5, make the appropriate adjustments.

This looks like a work-out room. There are mats on the floor, weights, and other equipment. The room otherwise seems to be empty.

There is nothing of value in this room. If party members choose, they can use the weights as maces, but receive a  -1 to both hit and damage rolls when using them.

11. PANTRY

This room is lined with shelves, and two additional rows of shelves are in the middle of the room. Sacks and barrels are stacked along the left wall.

The sacks contain flour, potatoes, beans, and other food. The barrels hold pickles, dried fish, dried meat, and other preserved food. The shelves are not very well stocked, but there are wooden boxes filled with vegetables and bottles. On one shelf, together with bottles of vinegar, oil, and other common liquids, are five vials. Three contain potions of healing, one contains a potion of invisibility, and one contains a potion of poison.

12. TRAINING ROOM

At the far end of this room is a window, and three more windows line the long wall to the left. All are barred. The floor is covered with straw, bales of hay, and padded posts.

This room is used for combat practice. The party cannot escape through the windows. Two battered, but serviceable, shields have been tossed into the northeast corner of the room.

13. ARMORY

Both doors to this room are locked. The commander and all the warriors (2nd level fighters) have keys.

This room is full of racks on which hang a large assortment of armor and weapons.

This room contains leather and chain mail armor in all human sizes, and a large number of short bows and arrows, short swords, spears, and shields. The party’s equipment is here.

All the party’s equipment, including magic items, are stored here.

14. TORTURE CHAMBER

The straw on the floor of this room is discolored. A number of strange devices line the west wall. In the middle of the wall is a shallow pit.

This is an interrogation and torture chamber. The stains on the floor are blood. The pit is a fire pit, with branding irons resting in the ashes of an earlier fire. The room contains a rack and two wicked-looking whips (D 1-2).

15. JAILER’S QUARTERS

This messy bedroom contains a bed, a table, a chair, and a lot of ragged clothing.

The gnoll jailer lives in this room. He has a large chest hidden under the floorboards beneath his bed. It is trapped with a poison needed. Anyone who opens the chest without first finding and removing the poison needle must make a saving throw vs. Poison or die. The chest contains 300 gp.

16. WINE STORAGE ROOM

This room contains barrels and kegs of various sizes. Several racks around the room are filled with bottles lying on their sides.

This room is used to store liquor. The barrels are filled with ale, and the kegs and bottles are filled with wine. A wine rack in the southwest corner doubles as a secret door to the treasury (room 42). To operate the door, one must pull on the second wine bottle from the left on the bottom shelf.

17. COMMON LIVING ROOM

NOTE: The following description assumes the party enters this room from the west along the north wall. If they enter from another direction, adjust the description accordingly.

This is an enormous room with many tables and comfortable chairs. The wall to your left and the far wall each have four windows. There is a door in the middle of the far wall that seems to lead outside. Two men dressed in leather are seated at a table in the far left corner, rolling dice.

The two men are veterans (1st level fighters) armed with daggers. They are completely absorbed in their game, and are surprised on a roll of 1-5 on a 1d6. The gambling stakes on the table consist of 24 gp and 52 sp.

If the fighters are attacked but not killed or silenced immediately, they yell for help. Make an immediate check to see if any of the wandering fighters come to help. Wandering fighters arrive in 1-3 rounds.

18. COMMANDER’S DINING ROOM

This appears to be a dining room. There is a large oval table in the middle of the room surrounded by straight chairs. The floor is carpeted. A closed cabinet is in the near left corner. Two large windows are on the far wall, and there is a door in the right wall, near the entrance.

This room is used by the commander when entertaining visitors. Inside the cabinet is a set of silverware (worth 600 gp) and fine china (worth 200 gp). There is nobody here now.

19. COMMANDER’S LIVING ROOM

This seems to be a living room. There are some tables and a number of comfortable chairs around the room. The floor is carpeted. There is a window along the left wall and a door in the far wall directly opposite the entrance. There are three people seated in chairs around a table across from the door through which you entered. You recognize two of them as the commander and the visiting officer. They are wearing leather armor. The third person is a woman dressed in ordinary clothes. Each holds a glass of wine.

The three people are the commander, his wife, and the visiting officer. Both the commander and the visiting officer are armed with daggers. Their AC and damage reflect bonuses from dexterity and strength. The commander’s wife does not fight.

If the alarm has been raised, the commander is armed with a short sword +1 and is wearing plate mail and a shield +1. Both these items are located in room 20 when not worn. The visitor carries a short sword. They cannot be surprised once the alarm has been given.

The commander is wearing a gold bracelet set with diamonds, worth 750 gp. He also carries two keys: one unlocks room 1, the other room 13.

20. COMMANDER’S BEDROOM

This is obviously a bedroom. There are two large beds, two wardrobes, a desk, a table, and several chairs. There are ornate rugs on the floor. There is a large window in the outside wall, a door directly across from the door by which you entered, and an open doorway in the wall opposite the window.

If the commander was not alerted, a short sword +1, plate mail armor, and a shield +1 are hanging on the wall.

If the party goes through the open doorway into room 20a, read the following:

This area appears to be a bath. There is a small stove at the far end and a large metal tub nearby. Closer to the door is a dressing table with a mirror.
 
A drawer in the dressing table has a false bottom that conceals 94 pp, 17 gp, and a cursed dagger —1.

21. VISITOR’S QUARTERS

This is obviously a bedroom, with a large bed, a wardrobe, a desk, a table, and several chairs. There are a few small rugs on the floor. There is a large window in the left wall, and an open doorway to your right. Otherwise, the room appears to be empty.

The room is empty. If the party goes through the open doorway into room 21a, read the following:

This area appears to be a bath. There is a small stove at the far end and a large metal tub nearby. Closer to the door is a dressing table with a mirror.

This room is empty.

22. VISITOR’S QUARTERS

This is obviously a bedroom, with a large bed, a wardrobe, a desk, a table, and several chairs. There are a few small rugs on the floor. There is a large window in the left wall, and an open doorway to your right. Otherwise the room appears to be empty.

The room is empty. If the party goes through the open doorway into room 22a, read the following:

This area appears to be a bath. There is a small stove at the far end and a large metal tub nearby. Closer to the door is a dressing table with a mirror.

This room is empty.

23. VISITOR’S QUARTERS

This is obviously a bedroom, with a large bed, a wardrobe, a desk, a table, and several chairs. There are a few small rugs on the floor. There is a large window in the left wall, another across the room from the door, and an open doorway to your right. Otherwise, the room appears to be empty.

The visiting officer is quartered here. Her things are in the wardrobe. In addition to clothing, there is plate mail armor, a shield, and a long sword. There is also a bag of holding that contains 2,000 gp and 6,000 sp.

If the party goes through the open doorway into room 23a, read the following:

This area appears to be a bath. There is a small stove at the far end and a large metal tub nearby. Closer to the door is a dressing table with a mirror.

This room is empty.

24-41. OFFICERS’ QUARTERS

All the officers at this outpost have private quarters. The rooms in this section are all identical. They contain a single bed, a wardrobe, a table with a chair pulled up to it, allow table near the bed, and chair near the low table.

24. FEMALE VETERAN’S QUARTERS
 
There is a sword on the low table and chain mail armor draped over the chair. A woman in leather armor is asleep on the bed.

The woman is a veteran (1st level fighter). The sword is a short sword. She has hidden 4 gp, 4 sp, and 4 cp under her mattress.

25. FEMALE VETERAN’S QUARTERS

The woman who lives in this room is currently in the lunchroom. There is chain mail armor in the wardrobe. There is a false bottom in the table drawer that conceals 7 gp, 5 sp, and 10 cp.

26. FEMALE VETERAN’S QUARTERS

The woman who lives in this room is currently in the lunchroom. There is chain mail armor in the wardrobe.

27. FEMALE WARRIOR’S QUARTERS

This room is slightly different from the others. Set apart from the rest of the room in the near left corner is a low table surrounded by four comfortable chairs. There is a desk in the far left corner, and a sword hangs on the wall beside it. Seated at the desk is a woman dressed in leather, writing a letter.

This woman is a warrior (2nd level fighter). In easy reach of her is a short sword +1. Because of her strength, she does 1 extra point of damage per attack. She carries a large pouch on her belt containing 10 gp, 21 sp, and 20 cp. She has a key ring with two keys: one to her room and one to the armory (room 13).

28. MALE VETERAN’S QUARTERS

There is a sword hanging on a rack on the wall.

The man who lives in this room is currently in the lunchroom. The sword is a short sword. There is chain mail armor in the wardrobe.

29. MALE VETERAN’S QUARTERS

There is a sword hanging on a rack on the wall.

The man who lives in this room is currently in the lunchroom. The sword is a short sword. There is chain mail armor in the wardrobe. The drawer in the table contains 1 gp and 3 sp.

30. MALE VETERAN’S QUARTERS

There is a sword hanging on a rack on the wall.

The man who lives in this room is currently in the lunchroom. The sword is a short sword. There is chain mail armor in the wardrobe.

31. MALE VETERAN’S QUARTERS

There is a sword hanging on a rack on the wall.

The man who lives in this room is currently in the lunchroom. The sword is a short sword. There is chain mail armor in the wardrobe. There are 4 gp and 7 sp hidden under the mattress.

32. MALE VETERAN’S QUARTERS

There is a sword on the low table and chain mail armor draped over the chair. A man wearing leather armor is asleep on the bed.

The man is a veteran (1st level fighter). The sword is a short sword. The drawer in the table contains 6 gp, 8 sp, and 2 cp.

33. EMPTY QUARTERS

This is identical to the other bedrooms, but it appears to be unused.

This room is empty.

34. EMPTY QUARTERS

This is identical to the other bedrooms, but it appears to be unused.

This room is empty.

35. MALE VETERAN’S QUARTERS

There is a sword hanging on a rack on the wall.

The occupant of this room is working out in the exercise room (room 6). The sword is a short sword. There is chain mail armor in the wardrobe.

36. MALE VETERAN’S QUARTERS

There is a sword on the low table and chain mail armor draped over the chair. A man wearing leather armor is asleep on the bed.

The man is a veteran (1st level fighter). The sword is a short sword. A pouch attached to his belt contains 3 gp, 4 sp, and 2 cp.

37. MALE VETERAN’S QUARTERS

There is a sword hanging on a rack on the wall.

THE GREAT ESCAPE: Monsters

Room Monster No. Hit Roll AC HD hp MV #AT D Save ML AL SA/SD XP
WM Veteran (F1) 1 or 2 19 7 1 7 each 120’(40’) 1 1-4 F1 N No 10
1 Gnoll 1 18 5 2 8 90’(30’) 1 1-4 or 1-6+1 F2 8 C No 20
2 Male Servant 6 19 9 1 3 each 120’(40’) 0 0 NM 6 N No 5
2 Female Servant 6 19 9 1 2 each 120’(40’) 0 0 NM 6 N No 5
6 Veteran (F1) 1 19 8 1 7 120’(40’) 1 1-6+1 ST Fl 9 N No 10
17 Veteran (F1) 2 19 7 1 6,5 120’(40’) 1 1-4 Fl 9 N No 10
19 Commander (F4) 1 16 6 4 24 120’(40’) 1 1-4+2 ST/DX F4 10 L No 75
19 Wife (NM) 1 19 9 1 3 120’(40’) 0 0 NM 8 L No 5
19 Visiting Officer (F3) 1 17 6 3 16 120’(40’) 1 1-4+1 ST F3 9 N No 35
24 Veteran (F1) 1 19 7 1 6 120’(40’) 1 1-6 Fl 8 N No 10
27 Warrior (F2) 1 19 6 2 8 120’(40’) 1 1-6+2 ST F2 9 N No 20
32 Veteran (F1) 1 19 7 1 6 120’(40’) 1 1-6 F1 8 N No 10
36 Veteran (F1) 1 19 7 1 6 120’(40’) 1 1-6 F1 8 N No 10
41 Warrior (F2) 1 19 6 2 8 120’(40’) 1 1-6 F2 9 N No 20

The man who lives in this room is currently in the lunchroom. The sword is a short sword (D 1-6). There is chain mail armor in the wardrobe. The wardrobe also holds a small pouch containing 6 gp and 2 sp.

38. MALE VETERAN’S QUARTERS

There is a sword hanging on a rack on the wall.

The man who lives in this room is currently in the lunchroom. The sword is a short sword (D 1-6). There is chain mail armor in the wardrobe.

39. MALE WARRIOR’S QUARTERS

This room is different from the other bedrooms. Set apart from the rest of the room in the left corner is a low table surrounded by four comfortable chairs. There is a desk in the far left corner, and a sword and a shield hang on the wall beside it.

The man who lives in this room is currently in the lunchroom. The sword is a short sword; and the shield is of normal make. There is a set of chain mail +1 in the wardrobe. A small purse hiden in a chair contains 7 gp and 12 sp.

40. MALE WARRIOR’S QUARTERS

This room is different from the other bedrooms. Set apart from the rest of the room in the left corner is a low table surrounded by four comfortable chairs. There is a desk in the far left corner, and a sword and a shield hang on the wall beside it.

The man who lives in this room is currently in the lunchroom. The sword is a short sword; and the shield is a shield +1. There is a set of chain mail armor in the wardrobe. A secret compartment in the bottom of the wardrobe conceals 8 gp and 20 sp.

41. MALE WARRIOR’S QUARTERS

This room is different from the other bedrooms. Set apart from the rest of the room in the left corner is a low table surrounded by four comfortable chairs. There is a desk in the far left corner, and a sword and a shield hang on the wall beside it. A man dressed in leather is asleep on the bed.
 
This man is a warrior (2nd level fighter). His superior strength gives him +1 to damage in any attack. He is wearing leather armor and has a dagger in his belt. The short sword and shield are of normal make. There is plate mail armor in the wardrobe. A key on the bedside table unlocks the armory (room 13). A locked metal box in the bottom of the wardrobe contains 19 gp and 20 sp.

The west wall of this room is paneled with wood. If the panel nearest the north wall is pressed just above eye level for a normal human, the secret door to the treasury will open. One of the chairs surrounding the table in this corner is backed up into this corner, so the chair must be moved in order to open the door.

42. TREASURY

This room is empty except for a number of sacks along the far wall.

This room contains most of the valuables of the outpost. Two small sacks contain 200 pp each. Six large sacks contain 500 gp each. Three large sacks contain 500 sp each. Among the sacks is a medium-sized iron box that is securely locked. It weighs 100 cn, and cannot be opened by force. A thief can pick the lock, or a knock spell will open it, but it cannot be forced open. The box contains three vials, each containing a potion of growth, a ring of fire resistance, and a rod of cancellation.

The result of the Great Escape scenario depends on how the characters do. If they fail to escape from the outpost, they will be placed in a wagon under heavy guard and their journey to Fort Doom begins. The first night out, the wagon will be ambushed by a raiding force from Luln and the characters will be rescued. The forced march back to warn Luln will fail; the raid will have caused heavy damage. Sascia will have other uses for her men-at-arms, but will outfit the player characters if they want to recover their equipment from the outpost.

If the party successfully escapes from the outpost, they will arrive at Luln in time to warn the town against the attack. Sascia and her guards will prepare an ambush and drive off the goblins with heavy losses. The situation will remain tense, and Sascia will make out a full report on the situation. When the party is ready to leave Luln, she will ask them to deliver the report to the scribe Franz Dubloi, who can be found with the military garrison in Specularum. The party will receive a small sack of gold for traveling expenses and will be able to deliver the message without difficulty. See the Veiled Society adventure for more details about Specularum.

The Town of Luln

Luln is a frontier town about the size of Threshold, but much more crowded, and its living conditions are slightly more primitive. The general services provided are much the same, but the quality is generally inferior to that of Threshold. Part of this is due to the fact that the Black Eagle Barony is close by, and continual humanoid raids have prevented the development of the land, which is rich.

The Baron’s role in the town’s troubles is something of an open secret, but the fact remains that Duke Stephan has his hands full with other matters and little short of a blatant invasion by the Baron’s regular forces will bring outside aid. The Baron’s strategy is to keep the area worn down by continual harassment while he builds his own forces. Then, when the Duke becomes involved in a major conflict elsewhere, the Baron can seize the town and hopefully conclude a separate peace with the Duke.

The Duke knows this, of course, and has placed the ambitious Townmistress Sascia (a high level fighter) in charge of the place. Her job is to preserve the town and build up the local economy in the face of the Baron’s interference.

The nearby Radlebb Keep assists Luln when it can, which is not often—the area its garrison must patrol is large, and the haunted Koriszegy Keep must be constantly watched. Also, Sascia has her eye on a knighthood, and is interested in proving her leadership without resorting to the Duke’s soldiers.
