THE CAVES OF CHAOS

Design: Gary Gygax
Revision: Dave Cook, Harold Johnson, Jon
Pickens, Michael Price, Evan Robinson,
Lawrence Schick, Stephen D. Sullivan
Editing: Mike Carr, David Cook, Harold
Johnson, Jeff R. Leason, Frank Mentzer, Tom
Moldvay, Lawrence Schick, Edward G. Sollers,
Stephen D. Sullivan, Jean Wells
Art: David S. La Force, Erol Otus, Jim Roslof

General Notes: This module, originally titled B2, The Keep on the Borderlands, has been the standard introductory module from the earliest boxed editions of the D&D® rules. The adventure consisted of a detailed Keep, to be used as a base, and a cave complex known as the Caves of Chaos. The latter has been included here.

Cave Maps……………………… 138-139

START: The forest you have been passing through has been getting more dense, tangled, and gloomier than before. The thick, twisted tree trunks, unnaturally misshapen limbs, writhing roots, clutching and grasping thorns and briars all seem to warn and ward you off, but you have forced and hacked your way through regardless. Now the strange growth has suddenly ended — you have stepped out of the thicket into a ravine-like area. The walls rise rather steeply to either side to a height of about 100’ or so — dark, streaked rock mingled with earth. Clumps of trees grow here and there, both on the floor of the ravine and up the sloping walls of the canyon. The opening you stand in is about 200’ wide. The ravine runs at least 400’ west (actually 440’) to where the western end rises in a steep slope. Here and there at varying heights on all sides of the ravine, you can see the black mouths of cave-like openings in the rock walls. The sunlight is dim, the air is dank, there is an oppressive feeling here — as if something evil is watching and waiting to pounce upon you. There are bare, dead trees here and there, and upon one a vulture perches and gazes hungrily at you. A flock of ravens rise croaking from the ground, the beat of their wings and their cries magnified by the terrain to sound loud and horrible. Amongst the litter of rubble, boulders, and dead wood scattered about on the ravine floor, you can see bits of gleaming ivory and white — closer inspection reveals that these are bones and skulls of men, animals and other things...

You know you have certainly discovered the Caves of Chaos.

NOTES FOR THE DM

CAVE AREA MAP: There are woods overlays and rough contour lines shown on the map. These are only for surface movement reference, and once your players are underground you should ignore these markings.

WOODS: The small groves and copses are thick growths, tangled and forbidding. You may, at your option, have characters encounter occasional monsters herein — stirges, humanoids (kobolds, orcs, etc.) from the caves nearby, or the like. Movement through these wooded areas is slow and difficult. Characters must move in single file. Even though not shown, there are single trees, shrubs, and bushes elsewhere.

UNDERGROUND: The caves, passages, and rooms of the complex are on different levels.

Passages slope upwards and downwards between the contours, even where stairways are not shown. Areas are rooted by at least 5’ of solid rock.

INTERIORS: Except where noted otherwise, all underground areas are natural or hewn from living rock. All surfaces are rough (and easy to climb for a thief) with small ledges, minor cracks, and small openings, etc.

RANSOMING PRISONERS: Organized tribes can optionally be allowed to take player characters prisoner, freeing one to return to the Keep in order to bring ransom back to free the captives. Set the sums low — 10 to 100 gp (or a magic item which the ransoming monster would find useful) per prisoner. If the ransom is paid, allow the characters to go free. Then, without telling the players, assume that this success brought fame to the capturing monsters, so their numbers will be increased by 2-12 additional members, and the tribe will also be very careful to watch for a return of the the adventurers seeking revenge for their humiliating captivity. The period of extra alertness will last 1-4 weeks; the increase in numbers is permanent.

TRIBAL ALLIANCES AND WARFARE: You might allow player characters to somehow become aware that there is a constant skirmishing going on between the goblins and the hobgoblins on one side and the orcs, sometimes with giant allies, on the other — with the kobolds hoping to be forgotten by all, and the bugbears picking off any stragglers who happen by. With this knowledge, they might be able to set tribes to fighting one another, and then the adventurers can take advantage of the weakened state of the feuding humanoids. Be careful to handle this whole thing properly; it is a device you may use to aid players who are few in number but with a high level of playing skill. It will too easy if there are too many players, or if the players do not actually use wits instead of force when the opportunity presents itself.

MONSTERS LEARNING FROM EXPERIENCE: Allow intelligent monsters (even those with only low intelligence) to learn from experience. If player characters use flaming oil against them, allow the monsters to use oil as soon as they can find some. If adventurers are always sneaking up on them, have the monsters set warning devices to alert them of intruders. If characters run from overwhelming numbers have the monsters set up a ruse by causing a few to shout and make noise as if there were many coming, thus hopefully frightening off the intruders. This method of handling monsters is basic to becoming a good DM. Apply the principle wherever and whenever you have reason.

EMPTIED AREAS: When monsters are cleared out of an area, the place will be deserted for 1-4 weeks. If no further intrusion is made into the area, however, the surviving former inhabitants will return or else some other monster will move in. For instance, a troll might move into a minotaur’s cave complex (1.), bringing with him whatever treasure he has.

Encounter Areas:

A. KOBOLD LAIR: There is a 2 in 6 chance that as the group enters the cave-like tunnel, 8 kobolds will come out from hiding in the trees above and attack first. Kobolds: (AC 7, HD 1/2, hp 3 each, #AT 1, D 1-4, MV 40’, Save NM, ML 6). Each carries d8 sp.

Note: 30’ inside the entrance is a pit. There is a 3 in 6 chance that each person in the front rank will fall in unless they are probing ahead. There is a 1 in 6 chance that individuals in the second rank will also fall in, but only if they are close to the first rank and the character ahead has already fallen in. The pit is 10’ deep, and those falling in will take 1-6 points damage. The pit lid will close, and those persons within cannot escape without aid from the outside. The noise will attract creatures from areas 1. and 2. Planks for crossing the pit are stored at #1., beyond.

1, GUARD ROOM: 6 kobold guards, (AC 7, HD 1/2, hp 3 each, D 1-4). They will throw spears the first round if they have initiative. Each carries d6 sp. One will run to alert areas 4. and 6, The guards will be alerted by loud noises or lights.

2. GIANT RATS (amidst garbage and waste): There are 18 giant rats (AC 7, HD 1/2, hp 2 each, #AT 1, D 1-3 plus disease, MV 40’, Save NM, ML 8). Each time a character is bitten there is a 1-in-20 chance of getting a disease unless a save vs. Poison is made. If the saving throw fails, there is a 25% chance the character will die in 1-6 days. Otherwise the the character will be too sick to adventure for one game month. These monsters are the pets of the kobolds, living off the garbage and waste of their hosts. They will rush to the sound of the trap door closing or battle. They have nothing of value in their lair or on their bodies, but their leader (rat #18) who will be at the back of the pack, a huge fellow (AC 5 due to speed and cunning, HD 1-1, hp 4, #AT 2, D 2-4/2-4, i.e. 1-3 + 1, MV 40’, Save F1, ML8) wears a thin silver chain set with 5 small gems (jewelry value 400 gp, chain value 50 gp, each gem worth 50 gp). The weight of a few rats will not trigger the pit trap.

FOOD STORAGE ROOM: The door is locked. This place contains various sorts of dried and salted meat, grain, and vegetables in sacks, boxes, barrels, and piles. There are also bits and pieces of past human victims. There is nothing of value here; even the wine in a large cask is thin and vinegary.

GUARD ROOM: Here are 3 very large ” kobold guards with chain mail and bows to fire down the passage at attackers (AC 5, HD 1+1, hp 5 each, #AT 1, D 1-6 MV 40’, Save F1, ML 6). The guards will hide behind the corner for cover, so all missiles fired at them will be at ~2 “to hit”. Each carries an axe in his belt and a purse with 2d6 gp.

KOBOLD CHIEFTAIN’S ROOM: This huge kobold is equal to a 2 hit dice monster, has 8 hit points, chain mail and shield (AC 4), with a large gem on a great golden chain about his neck (value 1,200 gp). He has the key to the storage room (#3). He hits for 2-8 (2d4) points of damage with a large battle axe. (AC 4, HD 2, hp 8, #AT 1, D 1-8, MV 40’, Save F2, ML 8). There are 5 female kobolds in the room also, (AC 7, HD 1/2, hp 2 each, #AT 1, D 1-3, MV 40’, Save NM, ML 8 due to the chief). There are heaps of cloth and bits of battered furniture in the place. Hidden in an old blanket hanging on the wall are 50 gp (sewn into the hem). Each female has dé gp. A locked chest holds 203 cp, 61 sp, and 22 ep.

COMMON CHAMBER: The bulk of the kobold tribe dwells here. There are 17 males (AC 7, HD 1/2, hp 3 each, #AT 1, D 1-4, MV 40’, Save NM, ML 6), 23 females (AC 7, HD 1/2, hp 2 each, #AT 1, D 1-3, MV 40’, Save NM, ML 6), and 8 young (which do not attack). If their caves are invaded, those able will help in its defense. Males have d6 sp each, females d4 sp each; the young have nothing. Amidst the litter of cloth and bits and scraps of odds-and-ends there is a piece of silk worth 150 gp. (If the party does not search, it will not be located.)

DM NOTE: Kobold losses will not be replaced, though injured kobolds will heal. If the attackers hurl oil at the kobolds, they will retreat if possible, rather than suffer damage. (Should they have the opportunity to find any flasks of oil, the kobolds will use them against attacking characters! )

B. ORCLAIR: Upon entering, the party will see that the wall 30’ to the north is decorated with heads and skulls (human, elven, dwarven) in various stages of decay. These cheerful greetings are placed in niches that checker about 100 square feet of the surface of the wall. Close inspection will show that one is orcish (see g. below). Sounds of activity can be heard from the west, but all is quiet to the east.

Area g: This narrowing area is a guard post, the watcher (Orc: AC 7, HD 1, hp 5, #AT 1, D 1-6, MV 40’, Save F1, ML 8) having a small window-like opening from which he can observe the entrance to the lair. A piece of gray canvas behind gives the impression that the guard’s head is another of the ghastly trophies that decorate the wall. If adventurers enter, he will quickly duck down, slipping a goblin head into the place his own was, and alert the orcs at 7.

7. GUARD ROOM: 4 orcs: (AC 7, HD 1, hp 5 each #AT 1, D 1-6, MV 40’, Save F1, ML 8). These guards are armed with spears. Each carries one for hurling and one to melee with. They have d8 ep each. When alerted they will rush to engage intruders, raising a hue and cry when they see them, There is nothing of value in their chamber, only pallets and shabby clothing hanging on pegs.

8. The watcher (g.) will alert the 4 guards here (exactly as in 7. above) who will rush west and then south to flank or surround the intruders threatening area 7. or 9. or approaching their own quarters.

9. BANQUET AREA: There is a great fireplace on the south wall and many tables and benches in this 30’ x 50’ chamber — the table at the north end having a large chair at its head where the orc leader usually holds court. The place is empty of orcs, although there is a small fire of charcoal burning in the fireplace. 

10. COMMON ROOM: Here are quartered 12 male orcs (AC 7, hp 4 each, #AT 1, Save F1, ML 8) and 18 females and 9 young (who do not fight). The males have 2d6 sp each, the others have nothing of worth. The few furnishings in the room are likewise of no value.

11. STORAGE CHAMBER: The door is locked. Amidst the stacks and heaps of supplies and goods here (see 3., above), there are 3 shields, 17 spears, and 2 axes in excellent condition (by some quirk of fate). A small crate in the far northeast corner contains a long-forgotten light crossbow and 60 bolts. There is nothing else of value in the place.

12. ORC LEADER’S ROOM: This large creature is clad in chain mail, has a magic shield +1, and carries a mace. He fights as a4 hit dice monster, has 15 hit points, and adds +2 to damage he causes when successfully striking an opponent (thus, 3-8 points of damage) due to his strength and skill. He carries 31 gp, and wears a ring set with a gem (total value 700 gp).

The room is carpeted, has tapestries upon the walls (note one of these covers the entrance to the small cave to the west), and battered but still serviceable furniture and a cot. His two mates sleep on cushions at the foot of his resting place. The two females in the place fight as males (HD 1, hp 3 each, #AT 1, D 1-6, Save F1, ML 8), and each has 2d6 gp on her person. The chests and other furniture have nothing of value.

If hard pressed, the leader will wiggle behind the tapestries on the south wall and attempt to work the catch on the secret door to the south and go to the rival tribe for help, but his very life must be in great peril before he will do so. (Adventurers can only spring this catch by rolling a 1 (on a d6) twice in a row, or having two characters do so simultaneously.)

Areat: This alcove is used by the orc leader to store arms and treasure. There are two complete suits of chain mail here (mansized and dwarf-sized), 4 swords, and a locked iron chest which holds 205 cp, 386 sp, 81 gp and 13 pp. A small niche in the back wall, with a boulder in front covering it, hides a potion of healing and a scroll with a 6-die fire ball spell on it.

(DM Note: Orc losses cannot be replaced, but after an initial attack by adventurers, four of the males at location 10. will move to area 9., arm themselves with light crossbows, and lay an ambush for intruders. If the leader is slain, all surviving orcs from this locale will seek refuge with the tribe at C. (see below), taking everything of value with them, and B. will thereafter be deserted).

C. ORCLAIR: Similar to the orcs at area B., these monsters inhabit cave areas 14-16. These orcs, however, do not rely upon a continual watch being kept; instead, they have a series of nearly invisible strings running across the entry passage, about 11’ from the entrance. When any of these strings is tripped, a heavy, weighted net suspended from the ceiling will drop upon the intruders, and metal pieces tied to it will create an alarm sound. (The trip strings will be spotted only if careful observation is asked for, each observer having a 1 in 6 chance of seeing the devices. The camouflaged net is 10’ wide and 18’ long, made of thick tarred ropes, and will entrap the victim for 1-4 rounds. Meanwhile, orcs from area 14. will be there in 1 round …)

13. FORGOTTEN ROOM: Only the two orc leaders (from this area and from B.) know of this place. They secretly meet here on occasion to plan cooperative ventures or discuss tribal problems, for although the separate tribes are not exactly friendly, both leaders are aware of the fact that there is strength in numbers. A small table and two chairs are in the middle of the room. A wooden chest to one side holds a bow, a quiver of 20 arrows, 2 swords, and 2 daggets. Two shields are hung on the south wall. There are only odds and ends otherwise, except that in the southeast corner, hidden beneath an old bucket (which is filled with black, stagnant water) are two small pouches, each holding one gem of 50 gp value, 10 gp, and 20 sp. Nesting under these small pouches, are 2 giant centipedes: (AC 9, HD 1/4, hp 2 each, #AT 1, D illness, MV 20’ Save NM, ML 7).

14. COMMON CHAMBER: Here are quartered 9 male orcs with shields and swords (AC 6, HD 1, hp 3 each, #AT 1, D 1-6, Save F1, ML 8) and 8 females and 3 young who do not fight. The males have d20 sp each, the females d4 cp, the young have nothing. The place is a mess, and there is nothing of value in it. The males will go to the entrance if they hear the net falling, arriving in 1 round.

15, COMMON HALL: General meetings are held here, and food is likewise cooked and eaten here. There are 6 males here, 2 with light crossbows (AC 6, HD 1, hp 3 each, #AT 1, D 1-6, Save F1, ML8) and 4 females (non-combatant), dwelling in the western forepart. Each has treasure on their person equal to 14. above. The males here will also go to the entrance if they here the noise of the net falling, arriving in 3 rounds.

16. LEADER’S ROOM: A guard (g.) is always posted just inside the door, and he cannot be surprised. (Orc: AC 5, HD 1+1, hp 6, #AT 1, D 1-6, Save F1, ML 8, carries 246 sp and d4 gp.) He immediately shouts an alarm if any intruders attempt to enter. Behind him are stacks of barrels and boxes and sacks — extra supplies for the tribe. (One small wine barrel, 400 coins in weight, contains a good quality wine worth 55 gp.) None of the other items here have value, and the foodstuffs are not up to human standards.

The area to the east houses the leader (AC 2, HD 3, hp 16, #AT 1, D 1-6, Save F3, ML 10). He is a very large orc who wears plate and carries a shield, uses a sword, and attacks as a 3 hit dice monster. At his belt is a magic axe +1 which he can hurl at an opponent, and he can do so and still attack normally in the same round of combat. His belt is of silver, with a gold buckle (total value 160 gp), and his sword has a 100 gp gem set in its pommel. In his purse are 8 gp, 17 ep, and 5 sp. His mate is equal to a male orc in combat (AC 7, HD 1, hp 5 #AT 1, Save F1, ML 10), and she has a bracelet of ivory which is worth 100 gp. The area is well furnished, and a small chest of drawers contains a sack with 50 pp tied shut with a rope of climbing. There is also a copper bowl, finely wrought and chased with silver, on a small table near the bed. It is filled with garbage and very tarnished, so it looks only as if it were worth 10 sp, rather than the actual 50 gp, unless it is closely inspected.

(DM Note: Orc losses cannot be replaced. If this tribe is attacked, they will have the males at area 15. watching the entrance, ready for a second try by the adventurers. If the leader is slain, the survivors will seek safety in area B., if possible; otherwise, they will flee the place entirely, carrying their goods away.)

D. GOBLIN LAIR: The natural cave quickly turns into the worked stone tunnels typical of this whole complex. The passageways here are very busy, and for every 10’ distance covered by the party there is a 1 in 6 chance that they will encounter a group of goblins (see below). Check each time the party travels 30’ (a 3 in 6 chance) until wandering goblins are encountered, then check no further. When an encounter occurs, the entire bunch of goblins will attack and cry out an alarm (Bree-Yark!) at the same time. Wandering goblins are in addition to those found in numbered afeas.

Wandering Goblins: 6 males, (AC 6, HD 11, hp 3 each, #AT 1, D 1-6, MV 20’, Save NM, ML 7). Each will have d6 sp. (They are patrolling and carrying messages back and forth. The group will also be carrying several bags (d6) of fairly good foodstuffs — not worth much, but quite suitable for human fare.)

17. GUARD CHAMBER: 6 goblin guards with several spears each (AC 6, HD 1-1, hp 3 each, #AT 1, D 1-6, Save NM, ML 7) are alertly watching both passages here for intruders of any sort, including hobgoblins from the south. They each have d4 x 10 cp and d4 sp. The chamber has a barrel with 60 small spears, a small table, 2 benches and a keg water.

18. GUARD CHAMBER: This is the same as 17., above, except the goblins watch mainly to the east. If there is a cry of “BREE-YARK” (“‘Hey, Rube!”‘), two of these guards will rush to the secret door, toss a sack with 250 gp in it to the ogre (E.,22., below) and ask him to help them. The ogre will accept payment and will enter the goblin’s lair and move to attack intruders immediately, if possible. The sack of gold coins is hidden in a water barrel in the corner by the secret door.

19. COMMON ROOM: There are 10 males (AC 6, HD 1-1, hp 3 each, #AT 1, D 1-6, Save NM, ML 7) and 12 females and 6 young (who do not fight) dwelling here. Food is prepared and eaten here, and general meetings are likewise held here. There are heaps of bedding, tables, stools, benches, etc. all around the whole place, making it very cluttered. Each male has d6 sp, each female has 2d6 cp. If the wandering group of goblins has not been encountered when the adventurers enter this area, be certain to have those 6 additional males in this chamber.

20. CHIEFTAIN’S ROOM: The goblin leader (AC 4 due to chain mail and shield, HD 3, hp 11, #AT 1, D 2-7 due to strength and skill, Save F3, ML 9), 3 guards (AC 5, HD 1+1, hp 7 each, #AT 1, D 1-6, Save F1, ML9 due to presence of chief), and several females are quartered here. The chief and the guards have bows hung on the wall, and if there is time, they will take them down and use them. If hard pressed, 2 of the female goblins can fight as well as males, and will do so (AC 7, HD 1-1, hp 2 each, #AT 1, D 1-6, Save NM, ML 9 due to the presence of the chief); the other females do not fight. The chief has a purse with 18 gp and 2 pp in it; each of his guards has 8 ep and dé sp. There is a silver cup (value 90 gp) under his bed.

This place has quite a bit of furniture in it — all scaled goblin-size, of course. A low bench near the bed has a secret drawer door under the seat, and inside is stored the treasure of the goblins: a tapestry with silver and gold threads which is worth 900 gp. Nearby is a stand with a pewter bowl which holds 273 sp and 321 cp.

21. STORAGE CHAMBER: Note that at position g there are 4 goblin guards on duty (AC 6, HD 1-1, hp 4 each, #AT 1, D 1-6, Save NM, ML7) armed with ready crossbows and swords. Many bales, boxes, crates, barrels, and sacks are stacked and heaped in the large chamber. They contain cloth, food, beer, and wine — all of no special worth. The hard-working but nottoo-bright goblins continually bring supplies of stolen and looted goods to this place. They do not realize that their large cousins, the hobgoblins at area F., below, use a secret door known only to them to steal the best foodstuffs and drink. If the adventurers stay in this chamber for more than 1 turn, a party of 4 hobgoblins will come through the secret door:

4 Hobgoblins: AC 6, HD 1+1, hp 6 each, #AT 1, D 1-8, MV 30’, Save F1, ML 9). Each carries d4 gold pieces.

(DM Note: Goblin losses cannot be replaced. If they are being soundly defeated by intruders, the goblins will attempt to hide or flee east. Those who do so will go from area 17. to area 23., inform the hobgoblins, and join forces with them, so adjust encounters appropriately.)

E. OGRE CAVE: Persons entering this place will notice a strong, sour odor and then notice what appears to be a huge bear sprawled asleep in the southwest part of the cave. This is nothing more than the skin of a huge bear which the ogre killed and uses as a bed, making it comfortable by heaping leaves underneath. The ogre sits in the eastern portion of his lair, and noises will certainly bring him ready to do battle. This huge ogre has AC 4, due to another thick bearskin he wears for protection. He strikes opponents for 3-12 (1d10 + 2) points of damage (AC 4, HD 4+1, hp 25, D 3-12, MV 30’, Save F4, ML 10). The ogre has grown wealthy by serving as a mercenary — generally on the side of the goblins (and their occasional allies, the hobgoblins), although he has been bought off by the orcs and gnolls from time to time. He will rush to aid the goblins when they toss him a sack of coins (see 18., above). If anyone offers him a greater fee — one which he can actually see and feel — it is 90% likely that he will simply take it (and the goblin’s money too!), and return to his lair.

22. The ogre sits here on top of a great leather bag. In this bag are seven large sacks which contain:

#1; 287 sp; #2 a hard cheese; #3: 182 cp and 91 ep; #4: 289 gp; #5 a keg of brandy (value 80 gp); #6: 303 cp; #7: 241 gp (actually lead coins with a wash of gold, so value of each is only 1 copper!).

If intruders offer him a bribe of 20 or more gold piece value, the ogre will be 90% likely to allow them to leave unmolested, but if he catches them again, he will attempt to kill them, whatever the offers. Hidden under a heap of old bones in the southern portion of his cave are 6 magic arrows +1, a potion of invisibility, and a magic scroll with 2 clerical spells — cure light wounds, find traps.

F. HOBGOBLIN LAIR: Seldom are these fierce creatures troubled by marauders, for the entrance to their lair is guarded by a stout, barred door at the back of the entry cave. Skulls are lined along the walls, and several are affixed to the oaken door to highlight a warning written in common runes: “Come in — we’d like to have you for dinner!” (Which could be misinterpreted as a cordial invitation to dine...) Careful inspection of the barred door has a 1 in 6 chance per person examining it of detecting a secret mechanism which allows a person outside to slide the bar back so the portal can be entered. If it is forced open, it will require three 1s (on a d6) to break the bar, and the noise will alert the six hobgoblins in area 26. If a knock spell is used to open the door, the noise of the falling bar will be heard, but the guards will not have time to react — the intruders will have two rounds before the guards come.

23. COMMON ROOM: This place quarters 5 males (AC 6, HD 1+1, hp 5 each, #AT 1, D 1-8, MV 30’, Save F1, ML 8) with d4x 10 sp each: 8 females (AC 7, HD 1, hp 4 each, #AT 1, D 1-6, MV 30’, Save F1, ML 7) with 2d6 sp each, and 3 young which do not fight and have no treasure. There are heaps of cloth and skins for beds, some odds and ends of furniture, a small barrel of beer, buckets, etc. in the place, all worthless. The males are watching the east door which communicates with the goblin lair (D., above) and are battle-ready.

24. TORTURE CHAMBER/PLAYROOM/ FOOD STORAGE: There are 2 very large, ugly hobgoblins here. Each is equal to a 2+1 hit dice monster, one having 10 hit points, the other 8 hit points, and both wear chain mail (AC 5). One also has a whip, as well as a sword, so that he can strike at opponents up to 15’ distant, and if a hit is scored, the whip will jerk the victim off his or her feet for and stun (paralyze) him or her for 1-2 melee rounds. However, once closely engaged the hobgoblin cannot make use of his whip, so he will cast it aside. Each of these monsters has a purse with d6 cp, sp, and ep. The larger also has a silver armlet worth 135 gp. They guard 6 prisoners who are chained to the walls. There are two chairs, a small table, a central fire pit, and various implements of torture in the chamber. The keys to the prisoners’ chains are hanging on the wall in the southwest corner. The prisoners are:

#1: A plump, half-dead merchant, scheduled to be eaten tonight in a special banquet. If he is rescued and returned to the Keep, the Guild will pay a 100 gp reward, grant the rescuers honorary Guild status, and exempt them for one year from any fees, dues, taxes, and the like which the Guild would normally collect.

#2: An orc (AC 7, HD 1, hp 4, ML 8) who will fight goblins and hobgoblins gladly, if handed a weapon (of course, he will seek to escape from the adventurers at first chance, taking whatever he can with him, and informing his fellows at B. (above) of what happened).

#3: A man-at-arms (AC 9, Fl, hp 5, ML 7) who formerly served as a guard for the merchant. He will take service with rescuers for 1 year if an offer is made, for room and board only, if given armor and weapons,

#4: A normal female, the merchant’s wife, in fact, who is also slated for the big feast. She will personally reward her rescuers by giving them a magical dagger +1 she has in her room back at the Keep.

#5: A crazy gnoll (AC 9 due to no armor, HD 2, hp 9, #AT 1, D 1-6, Save F2, ML 8) who will snatch up a weapon and attack his rescuers if he is freed. (He will cause only 1-6 points of damage due to his weakened condition.)

#6: Another man-at-arms as #3 above who will behave the same way his companion will.

25. COMMON CHAMBER: This large place is used for meals, meetings and general revels of the hobgoblin tribe. There are many tables and benches set out now, as the place is being readied for the coming feast. 4 males (AC 6, HD 1+1, hp 5 each, # AT 1, D 1-8, MV 30’, Save F1, ML 8), 5 females (AC 7, HD 1, hp 4 each, #AT 1, D 1-6, Save F1, ML 7), and 9 young (who will not fight) are working here. Males have d4 gp each, females have 2d6 sp. The head table has a set of pewter dishes on it, and their value is 25 gp for the set.

26. GUARD ROOM: 6 hobgoblins (AC 6, HD 1+1, hp 6 each, #AT 1, D 1-6, Save F1, ML 8), 3 with crossbows which they’ll fire once before dropping and taking their maces for close combat. Each carries d4 each gp, sp, c p. If they hear the door being battered, or the bar falling, all but one will immediately rush to the entry, while the other will alert area 27., and then join his fellows. It takes two rounds for them to reach the entry, and the sixth will join the other guards on round four.

27. ARMORY: 3 hobgoblin guards (AC 5 due to chain mail, HD 1+1, hp 6 each, #AT 1, D 1-8, Save F1, ML 8) are on duty here at all times. If warning comes, two will move to the door to wait in ambush, and the others will pass through the secret entrance (to area 31.) to alert the chief. Each guard has 2d4 each of sp and ep. In the chamber are the following:

1 suit man-sized plate mail
1 suit of dwarf-sized plate mail
3 suits man-sized chain mail
2 suits elf-sized chain mail
7 suits man-sized leather armor
11 shields
6 daggers
1 axe
4 maces
3 swords
2 bows (short)
1 longbow
13 crossbows
11 score arrows (14 arrows have silver heads)
9 score bolts
51 spears
19 pole arms
42 helmets of various sizes

Armor-type items are standing or hung from racks. Weapons are in chests or on pegs or racks.

28. STOREROOM: Goods stolen from the stupid goblins are kept here until needed above. There will be a single guard (AC 6, HD 1+1, hp 5, #AT 1, D 1-8, Save F1, ML 8) on duty here at all times. He has 2d8 ep. (If the hobgoblin looting party does not encounter adventurers in area 21., they will also be here: 4 hobgoblins (AC 6, HD 1+1, hp 6 each, #AT 1, D 1-8, Save F1, ML 8). Each of the four carries d4 gp.

29. GUARD ROOM: 2 hobgoblin guards with crossbows and swords stand here (AC 6, HD 1 +1, #AT 1, D 1-8, Save F1, ML8.) With them are 2 females who will fight (AC 7, HD 1, hp 4 each, #AT 1, D 1-6, Save F1, ML 7). Males have 2d6 each sp and cp, females have no treasure. There are two cots, a bench, a stool, and a large box (filled with soiled clothing) in the room. If attackers are seen, one female will alert area 30., the other area 31.1; then both will fight.

30. HOBGOBLIN CHIEF’S QUARTERS: This great ugly creature is particularly tough (AC 2 due to plate and shield, HD 5, hp 22, #AT 1, D 3-10 due to strength and skill, MV 30’, Save F5, ML 10). He has 5 pp and 31 gp in his purse. He wears a silver and gem studded belt (value 600 gp).

With him are 4 large female hobgoblins, each equal toa male (AC 6, HD 1 +1, hp6 each, #AT 1, D 1-8, Save F1, ML 10 due to the chief), and each has 2d6 gp. The room is crowded with furniture and junk — all of no real worth, except that there is a false bottom in a huge iron box filled with mangy animal skins. The secret portion of the iron box holds 25 pp, 200 gp, 115 ep, and 400 sp plus a 100 gp gem and a potion of poison. Amidst a heap of kindling wood near the fireplace (southeast corner) there is concealed a wand of paralyzation, with only 17 charges left.

31. GUARD ROOM: 4 hobgoblins (AC 5 due to chain mail, HD 1+1, hp 5 each, #AT 1, D 1-8, Save F1, ML 8), each with 2d6 ep, sp, and cp. They are alert for danger, and when notified, they will pass the word to areas 29., 30., and/or 27., as required. The room is rather bare, having only two pallets, a stool, and a large water barrel.

DM NOTE: As usual, hobgoblin losses cannot be replaced during the course of normal play, which is a period of only several days or weeks of action. The hobgoblins are fairly smart, well-organized, and alert. If their chief is killed, they will typically seek to escape alive, unless their opponents are obviously weak and inferior, Survivors will reinforce the goblins at D., above, unless their attackers are very dangerous and the hobgoblins can see that the whole Caves’ area is in trouble.

G. SHUNNED CAVERN: Even the normal inhabitants of this area, including the ogre, stay away from here, for the creatures that dwell herein are exceptionally dangerous. Any creature foolish enough to venture out at night becomes fair game. A horrible stench is noticed as soon as creatures enter the cavern area.

32. EMPTY GALLERY: The odor of these places is awful. Bones and rotting corpses are spread here and there amidst a litter of dead leaves and old branches. If a careful search is made, adventurers will find a coin every round: 1-2 = 1 cp, 3 —41 sp, 5-61 ep. The sound of such searching might bring visitors! Roll on the table below for an encounter:

1 Owl bear from 34., below
2 2-12 giant rats (AC 7, HD 1/2, hp 2 each, #AT 1, D 1-3 plus disease, MV 40’, Save NM, ML 8)
3 Gray ooze from 33., below
4-6 Nothing is attracted to the noise

33. SHALLOW POOL: This portion of the cavern is very wet, and all the walls and floor have a sheen from the dampness. There is a large pool of shallow water (as shown), and a few white, blind fish are swimming therein. There is a jewel encrusted goblet worth 1,300 gp in the water. There are 3 gray ooze monsters in this place (only 2 if 1 has already been encountered in a 32., area). Each causes 18 hit points damage on the first round, unless attacking from above, because half of their damage will be taken up in destroying the foot and leg protection of the victim. Thereafter, attacks cause 2-16 points damage, as do any attacks from above (AC 8, HD 3*, hp 15 each, #AT 1, D 1-8 first round and destroys armor, then 2-16, MV 3’, Save F2, ML 12). The pair always in the place are located at the south edge of the pool and the on the ceiling in the southwestern portion of the area. There is only a 1 in 20 chance of noticing either unless a pole or other device is used to prod the area before the pool, or unless two or more torches are held aloft so as to fully light the ceiling area. The third gray ooze will be on the ceiling to the left of the entrance, if present. 

34. OWL BEAR’S DEN: Owl Bear: AC 5, HD 5, hp 30, #AT 3, D 1-8/1-8/1-8, MV 40’, Save F3, ML 9). It sleeps in the most southern part of its den, digesting a meal of gnoll it just caught at dawn. If aroused, the beast will roar and rush out, striking with its two great paws, and toothy beak for 1-8 points of damage per hit, with three such attacks per round, i.e. a claw, another clawing attack, and then a snap of its beak. It has no treasure, but amidst the many sticks and bones it sleeps on is a bone tube (1 in 6 chance of noticing it for each person searching the heap, with a check for each once per round) with a protection from undead scroll within it.

H. BUGBEAR LAIR: The group of bugbears is not numerous, but what it lacks in numbers, it makes up for in strength and cunning. There are signs beside the entrance cave in kobold, orcish, goblin, etc. Each says: “Safety, security and repose for all humanoids who enter — WELCOME! (Come in and report to the first guard on the left for a hot meal and bed assignment.)”

35. GUARD ROOM: 3 bugbears (AC 5, HD 3 +1, hp 11 each, #AT 1, D 2-8, Save F3, ML 9) with 2d10 gp each. These creatures lounge on stools near a smoking brazier that has skewers of meat roasting over the coals. Each will ignore his great flail when intruders enter, reaching instead for the food. Though they do not speak common, they will grab and eat a chunk, then offer the skewers to the adventurers — and suddenly use them as swords to strike first blow (at +2 bonus to hit due to surprise!) unless the victims are very alert. There are two cots in the place and a large gong. If the battle goes badly, one will smite the gong to warn the others in the complex.

36. CHIEFTAIN’S ROOM: This tough old bugbear is equal to an ogre (AC 5, HD 4+1, hp 18, #AT 1, D 3-12 (d10 +2), Save F4, ML 9). He has a pouch holding a key, 29 pp, and three 50 gp gems. With him is a female bugbear equal to a male (AC 5, HD 3+1, hp 12, #AT 1, D 2-8, Save F1, ML 8, Save F3, ML 9). She has gold earrings worth 100 gp. The furnishings of the room are battered and crude, but several pieces of silk are mixed up with the bedding, in all 6 may be found; the party will be able to sell them for 20 gp each. There is a gray chest stuck up on a ledge near the ceiling which will only be spotted if the room is carefully searched. It contains 1,462 sp, a 30 pound statue of alabaster and ivory (worth 200 gp) and 2 potions of healing (which will break if the chest is roughly handled). It will take three or four strong characters to bring this down safely. There is a hand axe +1 on the wall, and if the chieftain has the chance, he will take it down and hurl it first, then close for full melee. He knows of the secret door — it is his escape route in desperate situations.

37. SPOILS ROOM: The heavy door is locked and the key is in the pouch of the chieftain (36., above). Inside are a magical shield +1 being used as a tray to hold a heap of dried herbs (catnip, something these particular bugbears relish), various boxes and crates of high quality dried or salted foodstuffs, leather hides in a stack, 3 barrels of ale, a tun of wine, and a small keg of oil (20 flask capacity). (If all but the shield and oil are sold at the Keep, the value will be 400 gp.) Breaking the lock or smashing the door will bring guards from 35. and the chieftain and his mate from 36.

38. COMMON ROOM: 3 males (AC 5, HD 3+1, hp 12 each, #AT 1, D 2-8, MV 30’, Save F3, ML 9) with 2d8 each of gp and sp, 7 females (AC 6, HD 2, hp 8 each, #AT 1, D 1-8, Save F2, ML 8), and 3 young bugbears (AC 7, HD 1, hp 3 each, #AT 1, D 14, Save F1, ML 7) dwell here. There are piles of bedding and old garments here and there. Blackened by soot, there is a silver urn worth 175 gp near the fireplace, but only close examination will reveal its true value.

39. GUARD ROOM: Watching here are 2 males (AC 5, HD 3 +1, hp 10 each, #AT 1, D 2-8, Save F3, ML 9) with 2d8 gp each and 3 females (AC 6, HD 2, hp 7 each, #AT 1, D 1-8, Save F2, ML 8) each with d10 gp. Each has a spear in addition to normal weapons, so they can hurl this missile and then close to fight hand-to-hand. These bugbears tend to the slaves as well as help to guard the entrance to their lair. There are bedrolls, a bench, a long table, a water pail, and sacks of meat scattered here and there in the chamber. Keys to the doors to 40. and 41. are on the wall opposite the stairs. Both corridors to the slave pens have meal sacks and small boxes and barrels of provisions and watered wine along their length.

40. SLAVE PEN: The iron door is secured by a bar, achain, and a heavy padlock. Inside is a litter of straw, a bucket, and the following slaves: 3 kobolds (AC 9, HD 1/2, hp 2 each, MV 40’, Save NM, ML 6), 1 goblin (AC 9, HD 1-1, hp 3, MV 20’, Save NM, ML 7), 4 orcs (AC 9, HD 1, hp 5 each, MV 40’, Save F1, ML 7), and 2 human fighters (AC 9, Fi, hp 4 each, MV 40, ML 7) — optionally add 1 dwarf (AC 9, D2, hp 12, MV 40’, ML 8) and 2 elves (AC 9, HD 1+1, hp 7 each, MV 40’, ML 8) in place of 2 of the kobolds and 1 of the orcs. They are chained to the wall with a common chain and a heavy padlock. All will fight against the bugbears if given weapons. (Treat as AC 9 unless protection is provided.) The humans will serve as those noted in F.,24., above. The dwarf and elves, if used by the DM, may agree to help the adventurers as long as they stay in the Caves’ area continuously and fight. The other creatures will desert at the first opportunity.

41. SLAVE PEN: Another barred, chained, and padlocked iron door keeps safe the following slaves: 3 hobgoblins (AC 8, HD 1+1, hp 6 each, MV 30’, Save F1, ML 8), 2 gnolls (AC 8, HD 2, + 1, hp 9 each, MV 30’, Save F2, ML 8), 1 (rebel) bugbear (AC 7, HD 3 +1, hp 14, MV 30’, Save F3, ML 9) and a huge human — a seeming wildman, with mighty muscles, shaggy hair and beard, and staring eyes. He is a Hero (a 4th level fighter). His 18 Strength and +1 for his level give him a total of +4 “to hit” bonus and +3 damage (AC 9 due to no armor, 4, hp 24, #AT 1 at +4, D 4-9, ML 10). He is prone to fits of berserk fury due to his enslavement, and if armed and in combat it is 50% likely per round that he will strike a friend instead of a foe in his lust to slay! If freed, these slaves will attempt to flee, although they will attack bugbears who are in the way of their escape. There are two exceptions: the big bugbear hates his fellows, and will take arms and fight against them or any other inhabitants of the whole area; he will continue to do so for as long as the party stays there. The hero is chaotic and evil; once he is armed, and after the battle madness leaves him, he will either kill the adventurers who freed him to have all their treasure for himself, or else he will steal whatever is most valuable and then sneak off — but only if he knows the party is too strong for him.

(DM Note: There are 2 bugbears out hunting, and they will return with a human corpse and 83 gp the day after adventurers first enter the bugbear lair. They will be placed on guard duty at 35., if appropriate, and their statistics are the same as the guards there. Bugbears will stay in place until all are dead, save the chieftain, who will seek help help from the minotaur I.,45.)

I. CAVES OF THE MINOTAUR: This labyrinth houses a number of nasty things, but the worst is a fiendishly clever minotaur who abides herein. Immediately upon entering the place, adventurers will feel slightly dizzy — the effects of a powerful spell which will cause them to lose all sense of direction.

The minotaur will agree to help the bugbears against invaders at the cost of one human slave every three days of service — of course, the slave is eaten in that period. The minotaur keeps only the choicest of treasures, tossing unwanted loot to whomever happens to find it at the mouth of the labyrinth.

(DM Notes: You may allow players to find a few low-value coins, normal equipment, weapons, or armor at the entrance. After 30’ past the cave mouth, the spell of direction confusion will begin to function, so start to misdirect them by naming incorrect directions, i.e. southeast instead of northeast, east instead of west, etc.

Don’t worry about calling the same passage as a different direction should they travel over the same route twice — that’s the effect of the magic on them. You may wish to allow the mapping character a secret saving throw every couple of turns, a 19 or 20 indicating that effect has been thrown off.)

42. STIRGE CAVE: There are 13 of these flying monsters here: (AC 7, HD 1, hp 3 each, #AT 1 at +2, D 1-3 the first round plus 1-4 per additional round, MV 60’, Save F1, ML 9). After an opponent is hit, the stirge will automatically suck blood each round thereafter, doing 1-4 hit points of damage until the victim is dead or the stirge is killed. The minotaur loves to catch and eat these creatures, so they avoid him, and they are quite hungry. In fact, this hunger makes it 90% likely that they will be squeaking and hooting to one another, so the party won’t be surprised. They have No treasure.

43. FIRE BEETLES: Three dwell in this area: (AC 4, HD 1+2, hp 7 each, #AT 1, D 2-8 (2d4), MV 40’, Save F1, ML 7). They, too, are hungry and will hasten to attack any persons entering this area. They have no treasure, but two glands above their eyes and one in their abdomen will glow with a red light, 10’ radius, for 1-6 days after the beetle is killed.

44. FIRE BEETLES: There are 2 of these creatures here, in all respects like those in 43., above.

45. THE MINOTAUR: This huge monster has AC 4 due to a great chain mail coat he wears, and carries a magic spear + 1(AC 4, HD 6, hp 35, #AT 1 or 2, D 4-9 or 1-6/ 1-6, MV 40’, Save F6, ML 12). When he attacks, the minotaur first rushes and stabs with the spear for 4-9 points damage (d6+3 due to his strength). The next round he will gore and bite for 1-6 points of damage for each successful attack. The minotaur may only use his spear or his horns and bite.

When intruders enter the area, the minotaur immediately moves to attack. He knows this area so well that the only way for victims to escape is to go through the secret door into area 36., or else to run out of the place and climb a large tree.

The cave the minotaur dwells in has skulls and bones arrayed in decorative patterns. The secret door is actually a slab of stone which takes not less than 3 humans to move. (It will be noticed by careful checking of the walls, but discovering how it is moved requires a roll of 1 on a sixsided die to find where it can be grasped. All of the minotaur’s treasure is behind this slab of rock. It hides:

1 locked chest (with poison needle in lock) — contents 930 gp and 310 ep staff of healing
1 man-sized (optionally elf-sized) magic plate armor +1
1 locked coffer — contents 3 potion bottles (gaseous form, delusionary healing, giant strength)
1 locked chest — contents 3 pieces of jewelry worth 1,600 gp, 900 gp, and 600 BP, respectively

GNOLL LAIR: The entry into this place is a small cave — and only at the end will worked stone be visible. If the adventurers have a light or make too much noise, the gnoll guards (46.) will certainly be alerted and ready.

46. GUARD ROOM: There are always 4 gnolls (AC 5, HD 2, hp 9 each, #AT 1, D 2-8, MV 30’, Save F2, ML 8) on duty here. Two have bows, will shoot at intruders until melee takes place; they will then run for help while the other two fight. Each gnoll has d8 each ep, sp and cp.

47. GUARD ROOM: 3 males (AC 5, hp 8 each, #AT 1, D 2-8, MV 30’, Save F2, ML 8) and 5 females (AC 6, HD 1+1, hp 5 each, #AT 1, D 1-8, MV 30’, Save F1, ML 7) are quartered here. They will be ready to fight immediately. The males have d6 gp each, the females have d4. There is a scattering of rude furniture in the place, heaps of bedding on the floor, several hides and pelts on the walls (one is a valuable sable cloak worth 450 gp), and a barrel of water in the southwest corner of the room.

48. LOCKED ROOM: This chamber is a store room and armory. Besides the usual provisions, there are 7 shields, a suit of dwarf-sized chain mail, 12 battle axes, 3 longbows, 5 quivers of arrows (20 in each), and a magic sword (—2 cursed). One barrel of exceptionally fine ale is leaking and the odor will tempt adventurers to taste it. It is so good, in fact, that there is a 5 in 6 chance per taste that he or she will draw a healthy draught and then spend the next 1-4 turns drinking. (If this occurs, be sure that you have the appropriate characters sing, make noise, and act foolishly. Any of their attacks will be at —2 to hit; this will continue for as many turns as they spend drinking i.e. 1-4).

49. COMMON ROOM: This place quarters the gnoll tribe — 6 males (AC 5, HD 2, hp 8each, #AT 1, D 2-8, MV 30’, Save F2, ML 8), 11 females (AC 6, HD 1 +1, hp 5 each, #AT 1, D 1-8, MV 30’, Save F1, ML 7), and 18 young who do not fight. Males have dé each of ep and sp, females d10 sp each. There is the usual clutter of worthless furniture in the room.

50. GNOLL CHIEFTAIN’S QUARTERS: The gnoll leader wears pieces of plate mail (AC 3, HD 3, hp 17, #AT 1, D 4-10 (2d4 + 2) due to his strength, Save F3, ML 10). With him are his two sons (AC 4 due to chain mail and shield, HD 2+1, hp 10 each, #AT 1, D 3-9 (2d4 +1), Save F2, ML 10), and 4 females (AC 6, HD 1+1, hp 5 each, #AT 1, D 1-8, MV 30’, Save F1, ML 9). The chieftain has a pair of silver armbands worth 50 gp each, and there are 39 gp in his belt pouch. His sons have d10 each gp, ep, and sp. Each female wears as silver neck chain worth 30 gp and has 2d6 ep in addition. The furnishings of the place are crude and battered. A large metal pot beneath a flagstone in the fireplace alcove hides 200 cp, 157 sp, 76 ep, and 139

The secret door and passage to area K., 63., is unknown to all parties. Just inside the entrance is the skeleton of a human thief; his leg broken, he must have died here trying to escape through the secret door. The rotten leather armor and corroded weapons are valueless, but the purse at his belt holds 12 gems of 50 gp base value each, and the elven boots upon his bony feet are still in usable shape.

(DM Note: Losses by the gnolls cannot be replaced. They have a loose alliance with the orcs, so any surviving gnolls will move to the orc areas and vice versa. If you wish, allow the chieftain to be able to escape by climbing up the chimney of the fireplace in his area.)

K. SHRINE OF EVIL CHAOS: A faint, foul draft issues from the 20’ wide cave mouth which is the entrance to this place. The worn path through the copse of obscenely twisted and oddly bloated trees gives those approaching along its length an eerie sense of unease, and as soon as they enter the cave mouth a dim awareness of lurking evil will pervade their senses. Red strata inter twines with bulging black veins running through the hewn rock walls beyond the entrance. The wide corridors and chambers are deathly still. A faint groaning sound, and a shrill piping may be occasionally heard, barely perceptible even if the party is absolutely silent and listening.

The floors are smooth and worn by the tread of countless feet of the worshipers at this grim place. The footsteps of intruders will echo alarmingly in these vaulted halls (+2 chance of being surprised if no precautions are taken), and extreme care must be taken to muffle such sounds if the party has any hopes of remaining undetected until the moment of their choosing. Continual noise will bring a group of zombie guards to investigate:

8 zombies: (AC 8, HD 2, hp 8 each, #AT 1, D 1-8, MV 30’, Save F1, ML 12). These ghastly monsters are clad in filthy red and black striped uniforms. Each carries a cleaver-like battle axe. (Each wears an amulet of protection from turning, so attempts by a cleric to turn them are made as if they were ghouls rather than zombies.)

51. BOULDER FILLED PASSAGE: Large rocks and boulders have been placed here in order to seal off this tunnel. It will take 100 man-turns to open a way large enough for a human to pass through into the area beyond (possibly outside and southwest of the Caves of Chaos).

52. HALL OF SKELETONS: This unusual audience chamber has a dais and throne-like chair set with 4 large red gems (500 gp each) at the south end. It is otherwise empty except for a dozen skeletons, clad in rags of chain mail and bearing battered shields and rusty scimitars, propped against the walls. These bony guards do not move, and any attempt to tum them immediately upon entering the chamber will have no effect, as they are obviously not animated. However, as soon as intruders touch the dais or throne chair, these monsters will spring into action from their positions on either wall of the chamber. Each has an amulet of protection from turning on it, so they are turned by a cleric as if they were zombies, (AC 7, HD 1, hp 3 each, #AT 1, D 1-6, Save F1, ML 12). They have no treasure.

Once the skeletons are disposed of, it is an easy task to pry the 4 garnets (gems) from the back of the chair.

53. GUARD ROOM: There will always be 8 zombies (AC 8, HD 2, hp 8 each, #AT 1, D 1-8, Save F1, ML 12), turned as if they were ghouls due to amulets of protection from turning hulking silently here, 4 at either end of the hall. Anyone entering will be attacked unless they are robed (see area 54., below) and have an amulet identical to the ones which the undead guards or priests wear. There is no treasure here.

54. ACOLYTES’ CHAMBER: There are 4 acolytes (1st level clerics) here (AC 5, C1, hp 4 each, #AT 1, D 1-6, ML8), all dressed in rusty red robes with black cowls. Under these robes, each wears chain mail and a mace at his belt. Each carries 10 gp in his purse, and the leader wears an amulet of protection from good. This amulet circles the wearer with a magical barrier against attacks by characters or creatures of other alignments by subtracting 1 from the “to hit” rolls of these opponents and adding +1 to the wearer’s saving throws. The amulet will also keep out melee attacks from enchanted (magical) monsters (such as gargoyles), but not missile attacks from these creatures. Their room contains four hard pallets, a brazier, a table, four stools, acabinet for clothing, a water pail, a waste bucket, and a flagon of wine and four cups. There is nothing of value amongst these items.

55. EVIL CHAPEL: This place is of red stone, the floor being a mosaic checkerboard of black and red. The south wall is covered by a huge tapestry which depicts a black landscape, barren trees, and unidentifiable but horrible black shapes in silhouette — possibly demons of some sort — holding aloft a struggling human. A gray sky is torn by wisps of purple clouds, and a bloody moon with a skull-like face upon it leers down upon the scene. Four black pillars support the domed ceiling some 25’ overhead. Between these columns, just in front of the tapestry, is a stone altar of red veined black rock, rough-hewn and stained brown with dried blood. Upon it are 4 ancient bronze vessels — a shallow bowl, a pair of goblets, and an ewer, a vaseshaped pitcher. They are also bloodstained but obviously worth a great deal of money. (The value is 1,000 gp for each cup, and 2,000 gp for each of the other items, but these are relics of evil, and any character possessing them will not part with them or sell them nor allow others to handle them. For each character who picks up one of these objects, the DM should roll a secret saving throw vs. Spells at —2. Any who save successfully will get a “feeling of great evil” about the object, and he or she may voluntarily put it down. If the save fails, the characters will rapidly fall under the influence of a demonic spell and within 6 days become a servant of chaos and evil, returning to this chapel to replace the relics, and then staying as a guard forever after. If someone attempts to destroy these relics, the great bell (see 58., below) will sound and the Shrine’s residents will come running in 3 rounds. If a detect evil spell is cast upon these items, they will glow an ugly purple, and all good characters will feel an instant loathing for them. If the character who has taken them has a dispel magic and then a bless spell cast upon him or her, there is a 60% chance of removing the evil on the first day, 50% on the 2d, 40% on the 3rd, 30% on the 4th, 20% on the 5th, and 10% on the 6th. Otherwise, nothing will be able to save the character!).

56. ADEPTS’ CHAMBER: There are 4 adepts (2nd level clerics) here, each clad in a black robe with a maroon colored cowl (AC 2, C2, hp 8 each, #AT 1, D 1-6, ML 8), wearing plate mail beneath their garments, and each bearing a mace. Their waists are circled with copper chains (worth 40 gp each) with skull shaped clasps fashioned of bone. Each carries a purse with 20 gold and 5 platinum pieces, and each wears an amulet of protection from good, which makes their effective armor class 2 vs. good creatures. The first and second have cause light wounds spells (does 2-7 points of damage to creature touched; normal ‘‘to hit” roll must be made to touch victim), the third a light spell, the fourth a cause fear spell (the victim touched must save vs. Spells or flee in terror for 1 turn; a normal “to hit” roll must be made to touch victim). They will use their spells first, if possible, before engaging in combat with weapons. In the room are four beds, four small stands, a table, four chairs, four chests for clothing, and various books and scrolls of evil nature — nothing of value. However, on the table are copper dishes and vessels (total weight 300 gp) of exceptional craftsmanship which are worth 175 gold pieces. (If the party opts to destroy the evil writings, they should receive an additional 600 experience points for the act, unless they are themselves evil, in which case they should receive points for keeping and reading these works.) If hard pressed, these evil clerics will attempt to flee and warn their master by striking the great bell (58.).

57. HALL OF UNDEAD WARRIORS: There are four files of the undead here, two of 10 skeletons each, two of 10 zombies each. The former face south, the latter north.

20 skeletons: AC 6 (due to chain mail rags & shields), HD 1, hp 3 each, #AT 1, D 1-6, Save Fi, ML12, turned as zombies.

20 zombies: AC 5 (due to chain mail), HD 2, hp 8 each, #AT 1, D 1-8, Save F1; ML 12, turned as if they were ghouls.

Upon the striking of the great iron bell at 58. below, the skeletons will issue forth from the south door of the place and march into the temple (58.) to line the south wall, while the zombies plod out the north exit to line the north wall of the temple. If intruders enter toom 57., are in the passage to the temple, or are within the temple itself. these undead warriors will attack. Proper garments and amulets warn by the characters will prevent attack unless the cleric commands the undead to do so. They have no treasure.

58. TEMPLE OF EVIL CHAOS: This huge area has an arched ceiling some 30’ or more in height. The floor is of polished black stone which has swirling patterns of red veins through it. The walls behind the draperies, and the ceiling as well, are of dull black rock, while the west wall is of translucent red stone which is seemingly one piece, polished to mirror-like smoothness. A great bell of black iron stands near the entrance point, with a pair of mallets beside its supports. To the south are several long benches or pews. There are three stone altars to the west: the northwest of pure black, the middle one of streaked red and black, the last of red with black flecks. At the western end of the temple area is a dais of black stone, with four lesser chairs on its lower tier and a great throne above. The chairs are of bone; the ivoty throne is set with gold and adored with gems of red and black (10 black stones each worth 100 gp, 10 red stones each worth 500 gp, and one large red stone worth 1,000 gp). The signs and sigils upon these seats are of pure chaos and evil. The other walls are covered by draperies of deep purple with embroidered symbols and evil sayings, done in scarlet and gold and black thread. As soon as the party enters the place, black candles in eight great candelabras on either side of the place will come alight magically, shooting forth a disgusting red radiance. Shapeless forms of purple, yellow and green will dance and sway on the western wall, and if anyone looks at them for more than a moment, they must save vs. Spells or be mesmerized into chanting a hymn to chaotic evil. Should three or more voices be so raised, the iron bell will sound automatically by magic, but even one such chant will alert the guards of the head cleric (see below). Zombie guards will enter here in 3 rounds after the party, even if the party is quiet.

59. THE CHAMBERS OF THE EVIL PRIEST: Location 59.g is the anteroom where special visitors are entertained by the chief cleric. There are lavish furnishings here, although none are of particular value except for a golden flagon and cups (flagon worth 500 gp, each of the nine cups has 100 gp value). Three zombies are on guard here (AC 2 due to plate mail and shield, HD 2, hp 13 each, #AT 1, D 1-8, Save F1, ML 12). They stand unmoving unless they are summoned by a chant from the temple area, someone enters their area, or they are commanded by the evil priest.

Location 59. is the private chamber of the evil priest. He is 3d level, wears magical armor +1, has a shield +1, and wears an amulet of protection from good which adds a further +1 to his armor class when attacked by good creatures (AC 0 or —1, C3, hp 14, #AT 1, D 2-7 (staff) or 1-6 (mace), ML 10). He attacks with a snake staff, which is +1 to hit. On command, the staff will turn into a snake and coil around a person hit. The victim is held helpless for 1d4 turns, or until the cleric recalls the the staff. The staff then crawls back to the cleric on command. He also has a normal mace hanging from his belt. He has a gold ring with a black gem (value 1,400 gp) and a purse with 51 pp in it. He wears a black cape and cowl, with red robes beneath. His spells are: cause light wounds (inflicts 2-7 points of damage) and cause fear. The priest must touch the intended victim, and successfully roll to hit, for the spells to take effect. He also has a scroll with three cleric spells on it: detect magic, hold person, silence, 15’ radius. He has a potion of gaseous form which he will use to escape through the boulder-filled corridor, 51., when all else fails.

His room is furnished lavishly, with red carpet, furniture of black wood with velvet upholstery of scarlet, and a large bed covered with silken covers of black and red cushions and pillows. A demon idol leers from the wall to the north, directly over the be bed. If anyone other than the priest touches it, it will topple over upon the character, causing 2-12 points of damage. It has two gem eyes (100 gp value each). The evil priest will dart behind a screen in the southeast corner, enter a wardrobe there, slip through a secret door in its back, and then down a short passage and out into the corridor through another secret door, should his life be in danger. When the secret door in the back of the wardrobe is opened by the party, 500 gp and 50 gems of 10 gp value each will spill from the wardrobe into the room to hopefully cause pursuers to stop for the loot. The priest will meanwhile either try to rally his forces, or else escape (assuming that most of his fellows have been eliminated already).

60. GUEST CHAMBER: This lower room is for important guests of the place. It contains a large bed, table, chairs, etc. There is nothing of value within, although the tapestries adorning the walls (things picturing evil cruelties and obscene rites) appear expensive. Beneath a velvet cloth on the table is a polished mirror.

61. TORTURE CHAMBER: There are various implements of torture here, both large and small — a rack, iron maiden, tongs, pinchers, whips, etc. Comfortable chairs are scattered along the walls, evidently so placed to allow visitors an enjoyable view of the proceedings. The torturer lives in the forepart of the place, and he will attack unauthorized persons who enter. He is a 3rd level fighter, hp 19, with chain mail under his black leather garments (AC 5, F3, hp 19, #AT 1, D 3-8 (1d6+2 due to Strength), ML 8). His weapon is a huge axe. Hidden in his mattress are 135 gp and a bracelet worth 700 gp.

62. THE CRYPT: The door to this room is bolted shut. This long hall is of roughly hewn stone, with a low ceiling. In it are many coffins and large sarcophagi with the remains of servants of the Temple of Evil Chaos. The sixth tomb opened will contain a wight: (AC 5, HD 3*, hp 13, #AT 1, D drains one level, MV 30’, Save F2, ML 12). There is a secret compartment in the wight’’s tomb; this contains a sword +2a scroll of protection from undead, a helm of alignment change, and a silver dagger worth 800 gp because of the gems set into its pommel.

63. STORAGE CHAMBER: There are many piles of boxes, crates, barrels, sacks, and so forth here — the supplies of the temple. There is nothing of value, and if the party stays within the place for longer than 3 rounds, a gelatinous cube will move from the corridor into the place and block it: (AC 8, HD 4*, hp 22, #AT 1, D 2-8, plus paralyzation, MV 20’, Save F2, ML 12). Inside the creature are d12 each of cp, sp, ep, gp, and pp, as well as several bones — evidently parts of a victim not yet wholly digested. (One of the bones is actually a wand of enemy detection with 9 charges left. If it is not gotten out of the monster within one turn, it will be ruined by digestive juices.) The secret door in the room leads to the gnoll chieftain’s cave. (50., above).

64. CELL: The door is of iron, locked and barred, but a window is set in the door. This is the place where prisoners are kept until tortured to death or sacrificed in the area above. There are several skeletons still chained to the wall, and one scantily clad female — a fair maiden obviously in need of rescuing! As she is partly around a corner, at first only her shapely legs and body up to the shoulders can be seen. Those who enter and approach closer are in for a rude shock! This is actually a medusa recently taken by the evil priest’s zombie guards. (AC 8, HD 4**, hp 20, #AT 1, D 1-6 plus poison, MV 30’, Save F4, ML 8). An opponent hit by the medusa’s attack has been bitten by the asp-hair and must save vs. Poison or die. Those looking at the creature — including those fighting her from the front — must save versus being Turned to Stone by the medusa.

Not being above such things, the cleric had plans for removing its snakes, blinding it, and then eventually sacrificing it at a special rite to a demon. The medusa will spare one or two of the adventurers from her gaze, promising them she has magic which will turn their companions back to flesh again, if they will free her from her chains. She does, in fact, have a special elixir, a potion of stone to flesh in a small vial, enough liquid to turn six persons back to normal, but she does not intend to give it away. If freed she will attempt to “stone” her rescuers.
