THE GREAT ESCAPE

Background

Investigating rumors of goblin raids in the vicinity of Luln, the party's camp is surprised one night by a horde of goblins (arranged by Anton if he is there). Tell the players as DM that their characters will probably die if they resist, and kill characters whose players force the issue. (This is something of an intelligence test, unintelligent play will cost a character at this point. Obviously, characters who surrender should not be killed). If Anton is there, he will gloat about having caught agents of the Duke. The characters will be force marched several days to an outpost of the Barony.

If the players complain that their capture was unfair, gently remind them that if adventuring was easy, anyone could do it—they can’t always expect things to go their way— and that there were clues. They will have ample opportunity to escape and recover their equipment, if they play well.

Notes for the Dungeon Master

The party members start this adventure with no armor or weapons. The spell books of any magic users have been taken away. However, all spell casters in the party have memorized spells, and can cast them normally. All obvious magic items have been removed from all characters. There is a 20% chance that small, inobvious magic items (such as rings) may have been missed when the enemy soldiers searched their prisoners.

Once the characters have escaped their cell, they can search for their equipment (stored in room 13) or attempt an immediate escape. If they escape without recovering their equipment, and make it back to Luln, the townmistress Sascia will equip the party with non-magical weapons and armor (and possibly a few scroll spells for magic users) so they can go back and clear out the enemy outpost.  They can then recover their equipment. If this occurs, replace all the men and monsters that the party killed during their escape. The entire outpost will be on alert when the party returns, and surprise will be impossible. This has no great campaign effect; border skirmishes are common.

Rooms that are empty or in which someone is sleeping are considered dark unless the room has windows or the text specifically states the room is lit. Rooms that are occupied by people who are awake always have light, either through a window or by a candle or lantern. Doors are not locked unless the text specifically says otherwise, and open easily.

The occupants of the outpost are intelligent soldiers. They work together, and once the alarm is raised or the escaping prisoners are sighted, they pursue the party in the most efficient way possible.

Remember, the players cannot map the outpost until (or unless) their characters find mapping implements and supplies.

The corridors and hallways of the outpost will be empty for exactly 10 turns after the party escapes from room 1. After that, the men and women currently eating a meal in room 2 leave the dining room by ones and twos, with one group leaving every other turn.  There is a 1 in 6 chance each turn that the party will have an encounter with 1 or 2 veterans (F1, AC 9, hp 7 each, dagger D 1-4, ML 8).  The veterans will attempt to sound the alarm if they get initiative and are not surprised. If the alarm is raised, the chance for an encounter increases to 3 in 6 each turn. If the party is already engaged in combat, there is a 1 in 6 chance each melee round that 1 additional veteran arrives to join the fight. Monster statistics are given on page 28.

1. PRISON CELL

The flickering torchlight barely illuminates the prison cell that you have occupied for the past two days. Talking quietly amongst yourselves, you have pooled a pitifully scant amount of information about your plight. You were captured by goblins and brought to this outpost, somewhere just beyond the Black Eagle border. You were blindfolded, herded through corridors and finally shackled in leg irons in this narrow cell.

It is important that you escape, and quickly. You have learned that a large raiding force of goblins, backed by the Black Eagle Barony, will soon descend on Luln.  The town must be warned.

Once you were securely shackled, your blindfolds were removed, and you could see your surroundings. Your prison cell is about 20 feet wide and 80 feet long. Iron double doors, securely locked, are along one of the long walls. The leg irons are attached to each other with a sturdy chain, about five feet long. The chain passes through a ring that is securely embedded in the floor of the cell, The torches that light the room are in brackets high on the wall—too high for you to reach.

You have heard human voices from time to time, but until this morning, the only creature you have seen is a large humanoid who bears a strong resemblence to a hyena.  He has brought you food and water three times each day. He is armed with a dagger and a mace, and carries a large key ring with several keys on it. He has muttered and complained in the common tongue because the commander has not let him torture you.

This morning, the human commander of the outpost and a visitor, a female officer from another Black Eagle unit, came into your cell and bragged about the trusted Black Eagle agent, Anton Turino, having captured you. He told the visitor that instead of being slain as spies, you are about to be taken to the slave markets of Fort Doom, There, you will have no hope of escape.

If you are ever to see your home again, you must act soon. Soon, it will be time for your noon meal...

Give the players up to 10 minutes of real time to create a plan. If they decide on a plan in less than 10 minutes, the jailer arrives as soon as the plan is set. If the players have not finished their planning when their time is up, the jailer attives anyway. When the jailer is about to enter the room, read the following:

You hear heavy footsteps approach, and the sound of a key turning in the door. It is your jailer, coming with your noon meal.  He enters alone, grumbling about something under his breath. He appears distracted.

The jailer is a gnoll armed with a dagger and a mace. It carries a key ring with six keys on it.  Only two are used in this adventure: one unlocks all the leg irons, and the other opens the prison door.

The gnoll is not particularly bright, and will go along with any reasonably subtle trick, such as feigned illness on the part of a party member. If captured and threatened, it will cooperate with the party, but will look for the first opportunity to doublecross them. It knows the party’s equipment is in room 13, but does not have a key to that room.

In order to give the party a fighting chance, the first magic spell that any party member casts in this adventure automatically succeeds, even if the victim is entitled to a saving throw.  This benefit only happens once for the entire party.

If the party’s plan does not succeed, the jailer leaves, taking the noon meal with him. He does not report the escape attempt because he doesn't want to look bad. He returns with the evening meal, this time very alert.

If the party does not escape within two days (six meals), a party of armed human guards escorts them out of their cell, and they are taken (in leg irons) to the Fort Doom.

Any further escape attempt are at the discretion of the DM (remember that magic users cannot re-learn spells without a spell book).  One possible rescue is given at the end of this adventure in Interlude C.

If the party escapes the room, read the following aloud:

As you carefully peer out the door of your cell, you see a corridor stretching to the left and right. You hear the sounds of conversation and laughter coming from the left. In both directions you see branching corridors and several doors.

2. KITCHEN AND COMMON DINING ROOM

NOTE: There are two openings (no doors) leading into the dining room, and one door (closed) leading into the kitchen. If the party peers through either door into the dining room, read the following:

You see a large room with many tables and benches. About 20 people are sitting at the tables; they are laughing, talking, and eating. Both women and men are present; all are dressed in leather armor and seem to be soldiers. There is an open kitchen in one section of the room; a door leads out of the kitchen.

If the party opens the door into the kitchen, read the following:

An open kitchen reveals a dining room beyond, filled with people. Two women are preparing and serving a meal. A delicious aroma of cooking meat comes from the kitchen.

The two women in the kitchen and ten of the people seated at the table are non-combatant servants. The rest are fighters wearing leather armor and armed with daggers.

There are 6 male servants, 6 female servants, 8 veteran fighters (1st level fighters), and 2 warriors (2nd level fighters). Two of the veterans are women. Each of the warriors has a key to the armory (room 13).

3. MEN’S COMMON QUARTERS

This room contains a number of beds and wardrobes, a few chairs, and a couple of tables. It otherwise appears to be empty.  There is an open doorway on the far side of the room.

This room provides quarters for the male servants. There is no one here at the moment.  Under one mattress can be found 12 sp and 14 cp. Under a second matress can be found 6 sp and 15 cp. A third mattress conceals 8 sp and 6 cp. A fourth holds 3 sp and 19 cp.

4. MEN’S BATH

This long, narrow room has an open doorway at the far end. There are several wooden tubs on the floor, and what looks like a stove in the middle of the room. The floor is wet, and there is a soap smell. The room appears to be empty.

This room is a bath. The stove is used to heat water for the tubs. The room is currently empty. The floor is very slippery; any character searching here must roll his Dexterity or less, using 3d6, or slip on the floor and turn an ankle. A turned ankle cuts a character's movement rate by half for 1d6 turns.

5. MEN’S DRESSING ROOM

NOTE; The following description assumes the party enters this room from the east. If they enter from room 6, you must make the appropriate adjustments. The small entranceway to the east of this room is currently empty. Both doors are swinging doors, and can easily be pushed open.

The left wall of this long, narrow room seems to be a curtain. The right wall is lined with pegs. One of the pegs has some clothing on it. There is a basket near the far end of the room that has some cloth things on it. Otherwise, the room appears to be empty.

This area is used by the men to change clothes before using the bath or the exercise room (room 6). The curtain has several gaps through which one can enter room 6. The clothing belongs to the man in room 6, and includes leather armor and a belt with a dagger. The basket is filled with wet towels.

6. MEN’S EXERCISE ROOM

NOTE: The following description assumes the party enters this room from the south. If they come from room 5, make the appropriate adjustments.

This looks like a work-out room. There are mats on the floor, weights, and other equipment. A man dressed only in short pants is doing push-ups near a rack in the near left corner of the room.

This man is a veteran (1st level fighter). He is AC 8 because of good dexterity. When he sees the party, he grabs a weight from the rack and uses it like a mace (D 2-7, due to strength). He is too far from the dining room to call to the others, but he fights as best he can. He runs to alert the others if he can.

There is nothing of value in this room. If party members choose, they can use the weights as maces, but they are — 1 to hit rolls and to damage when using them.

7. WOMEN’S COMMON QUARTERS

This room contains a number of beds and wardrobes, a few chairs, and a couple of tables. It otherwise appears to be empty.  There is an open doorway on the far side of the room.

This room provides quarters for the female servants. There is no one here at the moment.  Under one mattress can be found 7 sp and 5 cp. Under a second mattress can be found 8 sp and 20 cp.

8. WOMEN’S BATH

This long, narrow room has an open doorway at the far end. There are several wooden tubs on the floor, and what looks like a stove in the middle of the room. The floor is wet, and there is a soap smell. The room appears to be empty.

This room is a bath. The stove is used to heat water for the tubs. The room is currently empty. The floor is very slippery; any character searching here must roll his Dexterity or less, using 3d6, or slip on the floor and turn an ankle. A turned ankle cuts a character's movement rate by half for 1d6 turns.

9. WOMEN’S DRESSING ROOM

NOTE: The following description assumes the party enters this room from the east. If they enter from room 10, you must make the appropriate adjustments. The small entranceway to the east of this room is currently empty.  Both doors are swinging doors, and can easily be pushed open.

The left wall of this long, narrow room seems to be a curtain. The right wall is lined with pegs. There is a basket near the far end of the room that has some cloth things on it. Otherwise, the room appears to be empty.

This area is used by the women to change clothes before using the bath or the exercise room (room 10). The curtain has several gaps through which one can enter room 10. The basket is filled with wet towels.

10. WOMEN’S EXERCISE ROOM

NOTE: The following description assumes the party enters this room from the north. If they come from room 5, make the appropriate adjustments.

This looks like a work-out room. There are mats on the floor, weights, and other equipment. The room otherwise seems to be empty.

There is nothing of value in this room. If party members choose, they can use the weights as maces, but receive a — 1 to both hit and damage rolls when using them.

11. PANTRY

This room is lined with shelves, and two additional rows of shelves are in the middle of the room. Sacks and barrels are stacked along the left wall.

The sacks contain flour, potatoes, beans, and other food. The barrels hold pickles, dried fish, dried meat, and other preserved food.  The shelves are not very well stocked, but there are wooden boxes filled with vegetables and bottles. On one shelf, together with bottles of vinegar, oil, and other common liquids, are five vials. Three contain potions of healing, one contains a potion of invisibility, and one contains a potion of poison.

12. TRAINING ROOM

At the far end of this room is a window, and three more windows line the long wall to the left. All are barred. The floor is covered with straw, bales of hay, and padded posts.

This room is used for combat practice. The party cannot escape through the windows.  Two battered, but serviceable, shields have been tossed into the northeast corner of the room.

13. ARMORY

Both doors to this room are locked. The commander and all the warriors (2nd level fighters) have keys.

This room is full of racks on which hang a large assortment of armor and weapons.

This room contains leather and chain mail armor in all human sizes, and a large number of short bows and arrows, short swords, spears, and shields. The party's equipment is here.

All the party's equipment, including magic items, are stored here.

14. TORTURE CHAMBER

The straw on the floor of this room is discolored. A number of strange devices line the west wall. In the middle of the wall is a shallow pit.

This is an interrogation and torture chamber.  The stains on the floor are blood. The pit is a fire pit, with branding irons resting in the ashes of an earlier fire. The room contains a rack and two wicked-looking whips (D 1-2).

15. JAILER’S QUARTERS

This messy bedroom contains a bed, a table, a chair, and a lot of ragged clothing.

The gnoll jailer lives in this room. He has a large chest hidden under the floorboards beneath his bed. It is trapped with a poison needed. Anyone who opens the chest without first finding and removing the poison needle must make a saving throw vs. Poison or die.  The chest contains 300 gp.

16. WINE STORAGE ROOM

This room contains barrels and kegs of various sizes. Several racks around the room are filled with bottles lying on their sides.

This room is used to store liquor. The barrels are filled with ale, and the kegs and bottles are filled with wine. A wine rack in the southwest corner doubles as a secret door to the treasury (room 42). To operate the door, one must pull on the second wine bottle from the left on the bottom shelf.

17. COMMON LIVING ROOM

NOTE: The following description assumes the party enters this room from the west along the north wall. If they enter from another direction, adjust the description accordingly.

This is an enormous room with many tables and comfortable chairs. The wall to your left and the far wall each have four windows. There is a door in the middle of the far wall that seems to lead outside. Two men dressed in leather are seated at a table in the far left corner, rolling dice.

The two men are veterans (1st level fighters) armed with daggers. They are completely absorbed in their game, and are surprised on a roll of 1-5 on a 1d6. The gambling stakes on the table consist of 24 gp and 52 sp.

If the fighters are attacked but not killed or silenced immediately, they yell for help. Make an immediate check to see if any of the wandering fighters come to help. Wandering fighters arrive in 1-3 rounds.

18. COMMANDER’S DINING ROOM

This appears to be a dining room. There is a large oval table in the middle of the room surrounded by straight chairs. The floor is carpeted. A closed cabinet is in the near left corner. Two large windows are on the far wall, and there is a door in the right wall, near the entrance.

This room is used by the commander when entertaining visitors. Inside the cabinet is a set of silverware (worth 600 gp) and fine china (worth 200 gp). There is nobody here now.

19. COMMANDER’S LIVING ROOM

This seems to be a living room. There are some tables and a number of comfortable chairs around the room. The floor is carpeted. There is a window along the left wall and a door in the far wall directly opposite the entrance. There are three people seated in chairs around a table across from the door through which you entered.  You recognize two of them as the commander and the visiting officer. They are wearing leather armor. The third person is a woman dressed in ordinary clothes. Each holds a glass of wine.

The three people are the commander, his wife, and the visiting officer. Both the commander and the visiting officer are armed with daggers. Their AC and damage reflect bonuses from dexterity and strength. The commander's wife does not fight.

If the alarm has been raised, the commander is armed with a short sword +1 and is wearing plate mail and a shield +1. Both these items are located in room 20 when not worn. The visitor carries a short sword. They cannot be surprised once the alarm has been given.

The commander is wearing a gold bracelet set with diamonds, worth 750 gp. He also carries two keys: one unlocks room 1, the other room 13.

20. COMMANDER’S BEDROOM

This is obviously a bedroom. There are two large beds, two wardrobes, a desk, a table, and several chairs. There are ornate rugs on the floor. There is a large window in the outside wall, a door directly across from the door by which you entered, and an open doorway in the wall opposite the window.

If the commander was not alerted, a short sword +1, plate mail armor, and a shield +1 are hanging on the wall.

If the party goes through the open doorway into room 20a, read the following:

This area appears to be a bath. There is a small stove at the far end and a large metal tub nearby. Closer to the door is a dressing table with a mirror.

 
A drawer in the dressing table has a false bottom that conceals 94 pp, 17 gp, and a cursed dagger —1.

21. VISITOR’S QUARTERS

This is obviously a bedroom, with a large bed, a wardrobe, a desk, a table, and several chairs. There are a few small rugs on the floor. There is a large window in the left wall, and an open doorway to your right. Otherwise, the room appears to be empty.

The room is empty. If the party goes through the open doorway into room 21a, read the following:

This area appears to be a bath. There is a small stove at the far end and a large metal tub nearby. Closer to the door is a dressing table with a mirror.

This room is empty.

22. VISITOR’S QUARTERS

This is obviously a bedroom, with a large bed, a wardrobe, a desk, a table, and several chairs. There are a few small rugs on the floor. There is a large window in the left wall, and an open doorway to your right. Otherwise the room appears to be empty.

The room is empty. If the party goes through the open doorway into room 22a, read the following:

This area appears to be a bath. There is a small stove at the far end and a large metal tub nearby. Closer to the door is a dressing table with a mirror.

This room is empty.

23. VISITOR’S QUARTERS

This is obviously a bedroom, with a large bed, a wardrobe, a desk, a table, and several chairs. There are a few small rugs on the floor. There is a large window in the left wall, another across the room from the door, and an open doorway to your right. Otherwise, the room appears to be empty.

The visiting officer is quartered here. Her things are in the wardrobe. In addition to clothing, there is plate mail armor, a shield, and a long sword. There is also a bag of holding that contains 2,000 gp and 6,000 sp.

If the party goes through the open doorway into room 23a, read the following:

This area appears to be a bath. There is a small stove at the far end and a large metal tub nearby. Closer to the door is a dressing table with a mirror.

This room is empty.

24-41. OFFICERS’ QUARTERS

All the officers at this oupost have private quarters. The rooms in this section are all identical. They contain a single bed, a wardrobe, a table with a chair pulled up to it, alow table near the bed, and chair near the low table.

24. FEMALE VETERAN’S QUARTERS
 
There is a sword on the low table and chain mail armor draped over the chair. A woman in leather armor is asleep on the bed.

The woman is a veteran (1st level fighter). The sword is a short sword. She has hidden 4 gp, 4 sp, and 4 cp under her mattress.

25. FEMALE VETERAN’S QUARTERS

The woman who lives in this room is currently in the lunchroom. There is chain mail armor in the wardrobe. There is a false bottom in the table drawer that conceals 7 gp, 5 sp, and 10 cp.

26. FEMALE VETERAN’S QUARTERS

The woman who lives in this room is currently in the lunchroom. There is chain mail armor in the wardrobe.

27. FEMALE WARRIOR’S QUARTERS

This room is slightly different from the others. Set apart from the rest of the room in the near left corner is a low table surrounded by four comfortable chairs. There is a desk in the far left corner, and a sword hangs on the wall beside it. Seated at the desk is a woman dressed in leather, writing a letter.

This woman is a warrior (2nd level fighter). In easy reach of her is a short sword +1. Because of her strength, she does 1 extra point of damage per attack. She carries a large pouch on her belt containing 10 gp, 21 sp, and 20 cp. She has a key ring with two keys: one to her room and one to the armory (room 13).

28. MALE VETERAN’S QUARTERS

There is a sword hanging on a rack on the wall.

The man who lives in this room is currently in the lunchroom. The sword is a short sword.  There is chain mail armor in the wardrobe.

29. MALE VETERAN’S QUARTERS

There is a sword hanging on a rack on the wall.

The man who lives in this room is currently in the lunchroom. The sword is a short sword.  There is chain mail armor in the wardrobe.  The drawer in the table contains 1 gp and 3 sp.

30. MALE VETERAN’S QUARTERS

There is a sword hanging on a rack on the wall.

The man who lives in this room is currently in the lunchroom. The sword is a short sword.  There is chain mail armor in the wardrobe.

31. MALE VETERAN’S QUARTERS

There is a sword hanging on a rack on the wall.

The man who lives in this room is currently in the lunchroom. The sword is a short sword.  There is chain mail armor in the wardrobe. There are 4 gp and 7 sp hidden under the mattress.

32. MALE VETERAN’S QUARTERS

There is a sword on the low table and chain mail armor draped over the chair. A man wearing leather armor is asleep on the bed.

The man is a veteran (1st level fighter). The sword is a short sword. The drawer in the table contains 6 gp, 8 sp, and 2 cp.

33. EMPTY QUARTERS

This is identical to the other bedrooms, but it appears to be unused.

This room is empty.

34. EMPTY QUARTERS

This is identical to the other bedrooms, but it appears to be unused.

This room is empty.

35. MALE VETERAN’S QUARTERS

There is a sword hanging on a rack on the wall.

The occupant of this room is working out in the exercise room (room 6). The sword is a short sword. There is chain mail armor in the wardrobe.

36. MALE VETERAN’S QUARTERS

There is a sword on the low table and chain mail armor draped over the chair. A man wearing leather armor is asleep on the bed.

The man is a veteran (1st level fighter). The sword is a short sword. A pouch attached to his belt contains 3 gp, 4 sp, and 2 cp.

37. MALE VETERAN’S QUARTERS

There is a sword hanging on a rack on the wall.

THE GREAT ESCAPE: Monsters

Room Monster No. Hit Roll AC HD hp MV # AT D Save ML AL SA/SD XP
WM Veteran (F1) 1 or 2 19 7 1 7 each 120'(40') 1 1-4 Fl ime | No 10
1 Gnoll 1 18 5 2 8 90'(30') 1 1-4 or 1-641 F2 BANG No 20
2. Male Servant 6 19 9 1 3 each 120'(40') 0 0 NM 6 N No 5
2 Female Servant 6 19 9 1 2each 120'(40') 0 0 NM 6. SN SaNo 5
6 Veteran (F1) 1 19 8 1 7 120'(40') 1 16+41ST Fl 9 ANS No 10
17 Veteran (F1) 2 19 a 6,5 120'(40') 1 1-4 Fl 9 N No 10
19 Commander 1 16 6 4 24 120'(40') 1 1-4 +2 F4 1034! Se No 75
ST/DX
19 Wife (NM) 1 19 aes 3 120'(40') ° 0 NMS SLs TENG ARES
19 Visiting 1 17 6 3 16 120'(40') La DS 9= N< S<Noin455)
Officer (F3)
24 Veteran (F1) 1 19 Pi 6 120'(40') 1 1-6 Fl 8 N No 10
27 Warrior (F2) 1 19 eit 8 120'(40') 11-6 + 2ST F2 9 N No 20
32 Veteran (F1) 1 19 Fahad 6 120'(40') 1 1-6 Fi 8 N No 10
36 Veteran (F1) 1 19 7 1 6 120'(40’) 1 1-6 Fi Se Ne No sw
41 Warrior (F2) 1 19 6 2 8 120'(40') 1 1-6 F2 9 N No 2

The man who lives in this room is currently in the lunchroom. The sword is a short sword (D 1-6). There is chain mail armor in the wardrobe. The wardrobe also holds a small pouch containing 6 gp and 2 sp.

38. MALE VETERAN’S QUARTERS

There is a sword hanging on a rack on the wall.

The man who lives in this room is currently in the lunchroom. The sword is a short sword (D 1-6). There is chain mail armor in the wardrobe.

39. MALE WARRIOR’S QUARTERS

This room is different from the other bedrooms. Set apart from the rest of the room in the left corner is a low table surrounded by four comfortable chairs. There is a desk in the far left corner, and a sword and a shield hang on the wall beside it.

The man who lives in this room is currently in the lunchroom. The sword is a short sword; and the shield is of normal make. There is a set of chain mail +1 in the wardrobe. A small purse hiden in a chair contains 7 gp and 12 sp.

40. MALE WARRIOR’S QUARTERS

This room is different from the other bedrooms. Set apart from the rest of the room in the left corner is a low table surrounded by four comfortable chairs. There is a desk in the far left corner, and a sword and a shield hang on the wall beside it.

The man who lives in this room is currently in the lunchroom. The sword is a short sword; and the shield is a shield +1. There is a set of chain mail armor in the wardrobe. A secret compartment in the bottom of the wardrobe conceals 8 gp and 20 sp.

41. MALE WARRIOR’S QUARTERS

This room is different from the other bedrooms. Set apart from the rest of the room in the left corner is a low table surrounded by four comfortable chairs. There is a desk in the far left corner, and a sword and a shield hang on the wall beside it. A man dressed in leather is asleep on the bed.
 
This man is a warrior (2nd level fighter). His superior strength gives him +1 to damage in any attack. He is wearing leather armor and has a dagger in his belt. The short sword and shield are of normal make. There is plate mail armor in the wardrobe. A key on the bedside table unlocks the armory (room 13). A locked metal box in the bottom of the wardrobe contains 19 gp and 20 sp.

The west wall of this room is paneled with wood. If the panel nearest the north wall is pressed just above eye level for a normal human, the secret door to the treasury will open. One of the chairs surrounding the table in this corner is backed up into this corner, so the chair must be moved in order to open the door.

42. TREASURY

This room is empty except for a number of sacks along the far wall.

This room contains most of the valuables of the outpost. Two small sacks contain 200 pp each. Six large sacks contain 500 gp each. Three large sacks contain 500 sp each. Among the sacks is a medium-sized iron box that is securely locked. It weighs 100 cn, and cannot be opened by force. A thief can pick the lock, or a knock spell will open it, but it cannot be forced open. The box contains three vials, each containing a potion of growth, a ring of fire resistance, and a rod of cancellation.

The result of the Great Escape scenario depends on how the characters do. If they fail to escape from the outpost, they will be placed in a wagon under heavy guard and their journey to Fort Doom begins. The first night out, the wagon will be ambushed by a raiding force from Luln and the characters will be rescued. The forced march back to warn Luln will fail; the raid will have caused heavy damage. Sascia will have other uses for her men-at-arms, but will outfit the player characters if they want to recover their equipment from the outpost.

If the party successfully escapes from the outpost, they will arrive at Luln in time to warn the town against the attack. Sascia and her guards will prepare an ambush and drive off the goblins with heavy losses. The situation will remain tense, and Sascia will make out a full report on the situation. When the party is ready to leave Luln, she will ask them to deliver the report to the scribe Franz Dubloi, who can be found with the military garrison in Specularum. The party will receive a small sack of gold for traveling expenses and will be able to deliver the message without difficulty. See the Veiled Society adventure for more details about Specularum.

The Town of Luln

Luln is a frontier town about the size of Threshold, but much more crowded, and its living conditions are slightly more primitive. The general services provided are much the same, but the quality is generally inferior to that of Threshold. Part of this is due to the fact that the Black Eagle Barony is close by, and continual humanoid raids have prevented the development of the land, which is rich.

The Baron's role in the town’s troubles is something of an open secret, but the fact remains that Duke Stephan has his hands full with other matters and little short of a blatant invasion by the Baron’s regular forces will bring outside aid. The Baron’s strategy is to keep the area worn down by continual harrassment while he builds his own forces. Then, when the Duke becomes involved in a major conflict elsewhere, the Baron can seize the town and hopefully conclude a separate peace with the Duke.

The Duke knows this, of course, and has placed the ambitious Townmistress Sascia (a high level fighter) in charge of the place. Her job is to preserve the town and build up the local economy in the face of the Baron’s interference.

The nearby Radlebb Keep assists Luln when itcan, which is not often—the area its garrison must patrol is large, and the haunted Koriszegy Keep must be constantly watched. Also, Sascia has her eye on a knighthood, and is interested in proving her leadership without resorting to the Duke's soldiers.

Background

The following legend is very well known. All the player characters should be quite familiar with it. The information in this section can be freely given to the players.

The Church of Karameikos is widespread and popular mainly among the ruling classes of the Grand Duchy. However, one of its lesser orders most popular with the common folk is the Order of Chardastes. The Order grew out of an incident that happened more than 300 years ago. At that time there were many places in Karameikos dedicated to Traladaran worship. A small sanctuary in Marilenev (later renamed Specularum) was one of those sites.

One day, a woman who was very sick went to the sanctuary and prayed to have her health returned. While she was praying alone in the sanctuary, a being called Chardastes appeared to the woman. He told her that the religion of her people was false, and that his way was the only true religion. To prove this, he laid his hands on the woman and cured her of here illness. He also left behind on the altar a wonderful magical bell.

The bell, of ordinary size and shape, had been made of purest platinum. What made it so remarkable was that it had no clapper. Instead, it rang magically whenever it was picked up. When the Thyatians settled in Karamceikos, they incorporated the sanctuary into the Church of Karameikos.

The story of the bell has spread far and wide. Each year, on the anniversary of the miracle, hundreds of people flock to its small building, hoping to be cured by Chardastes. They crowd into the sanctuary, a hundred or so at a time, and pray as the clergy sings the sacred words and lifts the magical bell. Most are disappointed, but so many have had their prayers answered that the Order has flourished ever since.

All that changed about five years ago. At that time, there was a cleric in the Order whose name was Elwyn. Elwyn was very dedicated to the Church, and had been well rewarded by the Patriarchs and Matriarchs of the Church. But that, apparently, was not enough. There were rumors that Elwyn had begun practicing with edged weapons and researching the spells of the magic-users, trying to learn the abilities of the other classes. This was a serious charge, indeed. But before anyone could prove the charges, Elwyn vanished without a trace, And to the horror of the people, the sacred bell of Chardastes that was kept in the sanctuary was gone, too!

The Order has been in a state of crisis ever since. The faithful still come the the sanctuary  on the holy day, but there have been no miraculous cures since the bell vanished. The numbers of the faithful have decreased in recent years.

Some time ago, rumors of a powerful hostile force began to spring up. It was said that someone had built a large, monstrous fortress in a distant section of the county, and that those who attempted to investigate it had not returned. Recently, rumors have been circulating that Elwyn might be behind this mystery. The Patriarch Sherlane is interested in having the fortress investigated. He will have the party investigate the fortress, determine if Elwyn is involved, recover the sacred bell if it can be found, and bring Elwyn to justice if possible.

The party will be promised 500 gp apiece to investigate the fortress, 1,000 gp apiece to recover the bell, and an additional 1,000 gp if they are able to bring Elwyn alive to justice. If the party so requests, they are given an advance payment of 50% (250 gp each) with which they can buy non-magical equipment and supplies.

A local guide is provided to take the party through the wilderness to the mysterious fortress. The guide will not, under any circumstances, accompany the party into the fortress.

The party arrives on the anniversary of the miracle.

Notes for the Dungeon Master

Elwyn is a woman, but the information above has been written in such a way that the party will assume Elwyn is male. Allow the party to believe this so that they will not realize immediately that the woman's voice they hear when exploring the fortress is actually the voice of Elwyn.

Note that the fortress is built as a double spiral. There is a secret corridor that runs alongside the rooms and corridors through which the party will travel. This corridor is used by Elwyn to observe the party along the way. She occasionally provides hints to the party when they get bogged down (always, of course, in a derogatory voice accompanied by a diabolical laugh), feeling secure in her power and ability to defeat the party anytime she chooses.

Unless otherwise stated, the rooms are not lit. The only doors in the fortress (except for the entrance and the iron door between rooms 1 and 2) are secret. Once detected, they open easily.

The DM should copy the two treasure maps ahead of time and be prepared to hand them out to the players. The treasure maps need not be drawn to scale (page 158).

There will be no wandering monsters in Elwyn’s fortress. If desired, you can add wandering monster encounters in the wilderness through which the party travels to reach the fortress, but it is important not to have the party seriously weakened before the adventure begins! Monster stats are given on page 34.

OUTSIDE THE FORTRESS

You have traveled far into the wilderness, and finally you have arrived at your destination—the mysterious fortress that you suspect may harbor Elwyn and the mystic bell of Chardastes. Your guide has turned back after pointing out the final direction you must travel.

You follow a path that leads out of the forest and into a clearing. There, before you, is an enormous building. It is nearly black, and looks as if it might be made of iron.

Suddenly, there is a horrid smell as four ugly humanoids emerge from the forest to your left!

The humanoids are troglodytes. Because they have the ability to blend in with their surroundings, they surprise on a 1-4 on d6. Their smell is nauseating, giving their opponents a —2 penalty to their hit rolls unless the opponents make a saving throw vs. Poison.

The lair of the troglodytes can be found in the forest a short distance from the path. It consists of a hollow in a small clearing with an opening that leads to an underground lair. The troglodytes’ treasure consists of five large sacks, two vials, and a piece of parchment with some faded writing on it. Two of the sacks contain 500 sp each, two contain 500 gp each, and one contains 500 pp. The two vials each contain potions of healing. The parchment is Treasure Map #1 (give a copy of the map to the players at this time), showing the location of the treasure in room 5.

The party must defeat the troglodytes before they can enter the fortress. It is important that they find the lair and locate the potions and the treasure map. Give the players hints, or even a little advice, to get them to look for the lair.

1. ENTRANCE

As you emerge once again from the forest, you finally get a good look at the fortress. The walls are fully 30 feet high, and the jagged shape of the outside looks like a  black dragon's teeth when it opens its mouth to breathe. The walls are indeed made of iron. There is a door visible in the southwest corner.

The only entrances to the building are the visible entrance and the secret door near it. (The secret door between rooms 2 and 3 on the map leads to the lower level, not to the outside.) It is recommended that you not allow the party to find the secret entrance at this time—if they do, they avoid all the traps, tricks, and encounters, and find Elwyn at room 16a.

The visible entrance opens easily. The corridor behind the door is dark.

The corridor proceeds north from the door. After about ten feet, it opens up into a wide area to your left about 30 feet northsouth by 20 feet east-west. The area appears to be empty.

The area is empty. When the party has assembled in this room, read the following:

A musical, low-pitched female voice fills the air, saying, “Who dares to enter the Shrine of Elwyn unbidden? Turn back! TURN BACK NOW, for ahead lies certain death!” The voice then breaks into a diabolical laugh.

This is the voice of Elwyn, speaking from her secret observation corridor. The party is free to take her advice and leave—but this ends the adventure. If the party continues, wait until the entire party has crossed the area on the map indicated by a dotted line (between rooms 1 and 2), then read the following:

Suddenly, you hear a resounding “BOOM!” behind you. When you turn around, you see that a solid iron door has descended into the corridor, blocking your avenue of escape. You also notice that a small panel in the east wall has opened.

The open panel reveals an obvious keyhole. When the proper key is inserted into the hole and turned, the door will rise. Elwyn has the only key. The lock and the door cannot be opened by a thief’s open Jock skill, or with a knock spell.

2. DAIS

To your left you see an open area about 30 feet north-south by about 20 feet east-west. The area seems to be empty except for a raised area occupying the middle of the west wall. The raised area is about half a foot above the floor and looks like pol ished stone. There is a pedestal in the mid dle of the raised area. It is about three feet high and two feet square, and appears to be made of wood. On top of the pedestal is a black bell.

The altar is made of marble, too heavy to be moved. The pedestal is a solid block of mahoga ny; it can be moved, although it is extremely heavy. At least four party members are needed to move it. It would be worth 500 gp on the open market. The bell is a normal bell made of wrought iron, and is worth about 1 gp.

The secret door between rooms 2 and 3 leads to a stairway that is more fully described under room 5. It is better if the party does not discover it at this time.

3. ALTAR

If the party has been quiet as they proceed north through the corridor, read the following:

You hear a low murmur of voices coming from the north.

As the party enters the room:

To your left you see an open area about 30 feet east-west by about 20 feet north south, The entire length of the west wall is occupied by an altar. The room is dimly lit by a few candles on the altar. Kneeling at the altar are six human figures wearing plate mail armor; they are making a low, chanting sound.

These are six acolytes (1st level clerics) armed with maces. They are followers of Elwyn. If the door trap was triggered or the party was noisy coming down the corridor, the acolytes are aware of their coming; otherwise the party can surprise the acolytes. If the party tries to sneak past this room without alerting the aco lytes there is a 25% chance they can do so. If the acolytes notice the party, they attack.

There is nothing of value in this room and the acolytes are not carrying any wealth.

4. DAIS

To your left you see an open area about 30 fee east-west you about 20 feet north-south. The area seems to be empty except for an altar similar to the one your saw ear lier. There is a pedestal in the middle of the altar. On top of the pedestal is a bell that appears to be made of a reddish metal.

The altar is made of marble, too heavy to be moved. The pedestal is a solid block of mahogany; it can be moved, although it is extremely heavy. At least four party members are needed to move it. It would be worth 500 gp on the open market. The bell is a normal bell made of copper, and is worth about 5 gp.

5. TREASURE OF THE TROGLODYTES

To your left you see an open area about 30 feet east-west by about 20 feet north-south. The area seems to be empty.

This is the room indicated on the treasure map found in the lair of the troglodytes. The room is empty except for the secret treasure located at the spot on the map marked with an “X.” The floor in the room is hinged along the south wall. When the entire party has entered this room, Elwyn, who is observing from her corridor, triggers a mechanism that causes the floor to open up under the party. . .

Suddenly, you feel the floor begin to move beneath your feet. As the floor swings down from a hinge near the south wall, you fall into the darkness, landing on the floor below. The floor swings back into position above you, creating a strong gust of air that extinguishes all torches and lan terns.

5a. TRAP ROOM

No one in the party takes any damage from the slide. Party members with infravision can see. When light is restored, the remaining party members also see the following:

You are in a room about 30 feet square. It appears to be empty. A corridor leads off in one direction.

The room is empty. The party is now on the lower level of the fortress. The corridor leads to room 5b, and then to a series of steps that will return the party to the upper level, as shown on the map of the lower level.

5b. ORC LAIR

You see a large room, perhaps 50 feet long and 30 feet wide. There are a number of pallets about the room. Standing among the pallets are six small, ugly humanoids that look like a combination of animal and man. They are armed with short swords.

These are five orcs armed with short swords, and an orc leader armed with a short sword +1. The orcs attack the party as soon as they spot them.

If the party is using light, the orcs cannot be surprised. If there is no light, the orcs can be sur prised, but all humans without infravision receive a —4 penalty to hit rolls, and opponents who can see them receive a +4 bonus to hit rolls.

The room contains six small sacks. One con tains 200 gp, the others contain 200 sp each. The ore leader carries a small pouch containing 7 gems (worth 200 gp, 100gp (x5), and 50 gp, respectively). The floor is littered with an assort ment of bones, mostly human and humanoid. These are the remains of previous adventurers.

The corridor leads to a stairway. The stair way ends in a door that opens easily. This is the secret door between rooms 2 and 3. Do not tell the party where they are; let them discover it. As the party passes through rooms 3 and 4, read the descriptions of the rooms, modified by whatever has happened in the meantime. For example, if the party killed the acolytes in room 3, they find corpses. If they did not, the acolytes are still there, praying.

When the party returns to room 5, they find that there is a visible border around the collaps ing floor that is about three feet wide. If they wish, they can easily and safely move in single file to the spot marked with an “X” on the map.

At the spot marked “X,” there is a loose stone about three feet from the floor, When the stone is removed, a cavity behind the stone is found, containing the following: a clerical scroll with three cure light wound spells, a potion of poly morph self (labeled), a potion of growth (also labeled), a war hammer +1, and another trea sure map (this one leading to the treasure in room 9, Treasure Map #2).

The potion of polymorph self is from the D&D® Expert Set. It allows the user to change shape into that of any living creature with hit dice or level equal to or less than his or her own. The transformation does not change the user's ht points, hit rolls, or saving throws. The user gains the physical abilities of the new shape, but none of the special abilities (spell use, breath weapon, paralyzation attacks, etc.) The effect of the potion lasts for 7-12 (1d6 +6) turns. If the user is a spell caster, he cannot use his own spells while polymorphed.

6. EMPTY ROOM

To your left you see an open area about 30 feet north-south by about 20 feet east west. The area seems to be empty.

This room is empty.

7. DAIS

To your left you see an open area about 30 feet north-south by about 20 feet east west. The area seems to be empty except for an altar similar to the one you saw earli er. There is a pedestal in the middle of the raised area. On top of the pedestal is a bell that appears to be made of a shiny metal.

The altar is made of marble, too heavy to be moved. The pedestal is a solid block of mahogany; it can be moved, although it is extremely heavy. At least four party members are needed to move it. It would be worth 500 gp on the open market. The bell is a normal bell made of brass, and is worth about 10 gp.

8. GOLEM CHAMBER

You see an area to your left about 30 feet north-south by about 20 feet east-west. The room contains a strange humanoid creature about three feet tall and apparently made of wood. It is moving stiffly toward you.

The creature is a wood golem. A golem is a mon ster created by a high-level magic-user or cleric. Golems can be hit only by magical weapons. Magical attacks will work, but the golem is immune to sleep, charm, and hold spells, and to all gasses. Because it is clumsy, it has a penalty of — 1 on its initiative roll, and because it is made of wood, it has a penalty of —2 on its saving throw vs. fire-based attacks. If it is hit by fire, it also takes an extra point of damage per die. The room is otherwise empty.

9. TREASURE ROOM

To your left you see an open area about 30 feet east-west by about 20 feet north-south. The area seems to be empty.

The room is empty, except for the secret trea sure marked with an ‘‘X" on the map. The treasure map (Treasure Map #2) found in room 5 will reveal its location to the party. As in room 5, the treasure is hidden behind a block of loose stone at waist height. Behind the stone is the following treasure:

A smooth stick about 18 inches long. This is actually a wand of paralyzation (3 charges)— any elf or magic-user recognizes it for what it is, and only an elf or magic-user can wield it. The command word is written on the wand.

A sword. This is actually a sword +1.

A piece of rolled-up parchment. This is actually a clerical scroll containing a cure light wounds spell and a silence 15’ radius spell. The silence 15’ radius spell is described in the D&D® Expert Set. It will make an area 30 feet in diameter totally silent for 12 turns. Conver sation and spell use in the area of the silence spell are prevented. If cast on a person, the victim must make a saving throw vs. Spells, or the spell effect will move with the victim. If the saving throw is successful, the spell still works, but it stays in one place. The victim can then leave the area and speak normally.

A ring. This is actually a ring of spell stor ing. Its operation is fully described in the D&D® Expert Set. Once the ring is put on, the wearer knows what spells are in the ring and how to cast them from it. After a spell is used, the ring may be recharged by a spell caster, who must cast the replacement spell directly at the ring. The ring will not absorb spells cast at the wearer. The spells in the ring have the duration, range, and effect equal to the lowest level of magic use needed in order to cast them. This ring has two magic missile spells, a web spell, and a lightning bolt spell. The lightning bolt spell creates a 5 foot wide, 60 foot long bolt of lightning anywhere within its range (180 feet). Any creature in the area of effect takes 5d6 points of damage. If the vic tim makes a saving throw vs. Spells, damage is halved. If the lightning bolt strikes a solid sur face before reaching its 60 foot length, it rebounds back toward its caster until it reaches full length. If it hits its caster, the caster takes full damage (or half damage if the caster makes a saving throw vs. Spells).

10. DAIS

To your left you see an open area about 30 feet east-west by about 20 feet north south. The area seems to be empty except for an altar similar to the ones you have seen throughout this strange sanctuary. There is a pedestal in the middle of the altar. On top of the pedestal is a bell that appears to be made of a silvery metal.

The altar is made of marble, too heavy to be moved. The pedestal is a solid block of mahogany; it can be moved, although it is extremely heavy. At least four party members are needed to move it. It would be worth 500 gp on the open market. The bell is a normal bell made of silver, and is worth about 50 gp.

11. STATUE

To your right you see an open area about 10 feet east-west by about 20 feet north south. The area seems to be empty except for a large stone statue in the northeast cor ner. The statue is an image of Chardastes.

The statue is a living rock statue. It attacks by squirting magma from its fingertips as soon as any party member enters the space. A wom an’s diabolical laughter (Elwyn, again) is heard as the creature attacks. There is no trea sure here.

12. EMPTY ROOM

To your right you see an open area about 10 feet east-west by about 20 feet north south. The area appears to be empty.

When the first character enters the room, a pit trap covering the entire 10x20 area opens up. The pit is 10 feet deep, and the victim takes 1-6 points of damage from the fall. The room is otherwise empty.

13. STATUE

The corridor widens here to form a room about 30 feet north-south by about 20 feet east-west. The corridor continues off to the east. The room appears to be empty except for a statue of a small horse in the southeast corner, The statue is made of a yellowish metal.

The statue is made of solid bronze, and can not be moved. It is immune to any damage. If it is struck by a hand-held metal weapon, the wielder of the weapon suffers 2-5 points of damage from electrical shock (no saving throw). There is nothing else in the room.

14. DAIS

The corridor widens here to form a room about 30 feet north-south by about 20 feet east-west. The corridor continues off to the cast. This area contains an altar identical to the ones you have seen before. The bell on the altar is made of a golden metal.

The altar is made of marble, too heavy to be moved. The pedestal is a solid block of mahogany; it can be moved, although it is extremely heavy. At least four party members are needed to move it. It would be worth 500 gp on the open market. The bell is a normal bell made of gold, and is worth about 500 gp.

15. CELL

To your right you see an open area about 10 feet east-west by about 20 feet north south. The area appears to be empty.

The area is empty. If the entire party enters the room, an iron grate suddenly descends (trig gered by Elwyn, who is watching, as usual), trapping the party in the room. Elwyn laughs diabolically. A panel opens up in the east wall of the corridor, across from the cell. Behind the panel is a keyhole with a key stuck in it. “Just turn the key, and freedom is yours,” she says mockingly. The key, when turned, causes the portcullis to raise.

There are several solutions available to the party. A knock spell cast on the keyhole causes the key to turn magically. If the party has the polymorph self potion, one member can drink it, change into a creature small enough to slip through the bars, exit the cell, wait for the potion to wear off (or change to to a larger or normal form), then turn the key. A character can attempt to lasso the key and turn it in the lock by twisting the rope. This requires a suc cessful hit roll with a —3 penalty, but unlim ited attempts are allowed. Characters with a combined strength of 36 or more can bend the bars of the cell enough to allow passage; how ever, each character helping to bend the bars must make a saving throw vs. Paralysis or strain a muscle. The effect of a strained muscle is to give a character a —2 penalty to hit rolls for the rest of the adventure.

Creative players may come up with other unusual methods to escape this trap. Reward clever and creative thinking by allowing any reasonably good suggestion to succeed. Give a special award of 100 experience points to the player who comes up with a workable and cre ative solution to the trap.

ELWYN’S SANCTUARY

16. BLACK DRAGON

The corridor widens here to form a room about 20 feet square. The corridor con tinues off to the west. A huge, black lizard-like creature with wings is asleep and snoring in the corner. It has an iron collar around its neck and it is chained to the wall. There are several large sacks in the northwest corner.

The creature is a young black dragon, asleep. The party gets one round of free attacks, with a +2 bonus on all hit rolls. The chain on the dragon allows it to move up to 30 feet in any direction. If the party tries to sneak past the dragon, it automatically wakes up.

The area on the map marked 16a is a secret door leading to the corridor from which Elwyn has been spying on the party. It is better if the party does not find the door at this time. If they do, proceed to the final encounter with Elwyn. Otherwise, the party will meet Elwyn here after they have been to area 21. The final encounter with Elwyn takes place here when the party tries to leave.

17-21. THE INNERMOST SANCTUARY

Read the following to the players as they enter the corridor that leads to area 21.

You see a large open area, about 20 feet wide and more than 100 feet long. It is dimly lit by a few candles in sconces along the walls. There are four niches that extend out from the center aisle: two about 30 feet from this end of the hall and two more almost at the end. The far end seems to fade away into darkness. The walls that you can see are painted with abstract designs in soft colors.

This is the innermost sanctuary of Elwyn’s for tress. The party will presumably explore the area as they approach area 21. Note that the woman portrayed in the murals located behind the curtains is the same in each mural. If the party does not realize this, tell them after they have seen the third mural.

17. ALCOVE

The west wall of this area is covered by a black curtain.

If the party looks behind the curtain, they see:

You see a mural depicting a woman in a bright yellow robe with a drawn sword in her hand. She is surrounded by human vic tims.

18. ALCOVE

The east wall of this area is covered by a black curtain.

If the party looks behind the curtain, they see:

You see a mural depicting a woman in a lavender robe kneeling at an altar. She is flanked by six men wearing black robes and armed with maces. They are standing at attention. The glint of metal armor can be seen under their robes.

19. ALCOVE

The west wall of this area is covered by a black curtain.

If the party looks behind the curtain, they see:

You see a mural depicting a woman in a white robe. She is about to shoot an arrow from a longbow at a being who is begin ning to disappear into the sky. You recog nize the being as Chardastes.

20. ALCOVE

The east wall of this area is covered by a black curtain.

If the party looks behind the curtain, they see:

There is a pedestal in the middle of the raised area. It is about three feet high, five feet deep, and ten feet wide, and appears to be made of wood. On top of the pedes tal is a bell that appears to be made of a sil ver metal.

You see a mural depicting a woman in a black robe about to descend into a great chasm. Leading her into the chasm is a n enormous male humanoid figure covered with short, dark fur. Only his hands and feet are uncovered. He wears no clothing.

The party member with the highest intelli gence recognizes this being as Leptar, a chaotic Immortal who was long ago defeated by Char dastes.

21. ALTAR

Until the party has examined all four murals, this area is shrouded in darkness, caused by the clerical spell darkness, cast by Elwyn. (Darkness is the reverse of light, and creates a 30 foot circle of darkness.) As soon as the party has examined the last of the four murals, the following occurs:

As you turn away from the mural, the darkness in the area to the north dissolves, revealing an area about 20 feet square. The entire area is raised about half a foot above the floor and looks like polished stone.

The altar is made of marble, too heavy to be moved. The pedestal is a solid block of mahogany; it can be moved, although it is extremely heavy. At least four party members are needed to move it. It would be worth 500 gp on the open market. The bell is, of course, the sacred platinum bell for which the party has been seeking. If someone picks it up, the following occurs:

As you pick up the sacred bell, it begins to ring. At almost the same time, four crea tures appear and swoop down upon you, as if called by the sound of the bell. Two of the creatures are ugly things with horns and long fangs. The other two are dark and hard to make out. Their outlines seem to shimmer and you can almost see through them.

The horned creatures are flying gargoyles; the other two creatures are shadows. They have emerged through the one-way secret doors in areas 19 and 20, and immediately attack the party.

Gargoyles can only be hit with magic or magical weapons. They are not affected by sleep and charm spells. Shadows can only be special hit by magical weapons. When a shadow
scores a hit on an opponent, it drains one point of Strength from its victim in addition to causing normal damage. The loss of Strength lasts for eight turns, but any creature
whose Strength is reduced to zero becomes a shadow. Shadows, like gargoyles, are unaffected by sleep and charm spells.

ELWYN’S SANCTUARY: Monsters
Room Monster No. Hit Roll AC HD hp MV #AT D Save ML AL SA/SD XP
— _ Trolodyte 	4 18 5 2 12,14,10,10 120'(40') 3 1-4/1-4/1-4 F2 9 C Yes 30
3 Acolyte (C1) 	6 19 2 1 6 each 120'(40') 1 1-6 + 1 sword F1 9 C No 10
5b Orc Leader 	1 18 5 2 9 120'(40') 1 ee < Fl bi GES ND No 20
5b Orcs 5 19 5 1 Geach 120'(40') 1 1-6 Fl g. | Nor adi-10
8 Wooden Golem 1 17 7 eZ 14 120'(40') 1 1-8 Fl 2 hiN Yes 35
11 Rock Living Statue 1 16 4 5 23 60'(20') 2° -2-12/2-12 F5 11 C Yes 300
16 Black Dragon 1 16 2 7 28 90'(30') or 3 2-§/2-5/2-20 F7 8 Cc Yes 1250
240'(80') fly
21 Gargoyle 2 16 5 4 18,15 90'(30') or 4° 1-3/1-3/1-6/ FB A1-— Ce Wes: e825:
150'(50’) fly 1-4
21 Shadow 2 17 7 242 9,12 90'(30') 1 1-4 + special F2 12 C Yes 35
16 Elwyn (C6) 1 17 a 6 24 120'(40') 1 1-6 + Gilt 12S) siaNessts) 500

16a. EDWYN THE ARDANT

If the party defeats the monsters and recovers the sacred bell, they can then leave the for- tress. However, as they leave, Elwyn the Ardent leaves her secret corridor and is wait- ing for the party in area 16a.

You see a woman standing in the corridor to the east. She is wearing a striped robe of bright yellow, lavender, white, and black, and she carries a glowing shield, She is clearly the woman depicted in the murals. There is a glint of metal armor beneath her robe, and on her belt is a key ring and a mace. As she begins to speak, you recog- nize the voice that has taunted you throughout this expedition:

“In the name of Leptar, welcome to MY holy sanctuary. You have done very well; much better than all the other miserable wretches that have tried to assault my for- tress. I presume you found their bones after you defeated my orcs. Oh, well, orcs are easy to find, and they like working for Elwyn the Ardent. The new ones will enjoy feasting on YOUR bones when I get through with you!”

Elwyn is wearing plate mail armor and carries a shield +1. The key ring on her belt opens the iron door between rooms 1 and 2. She is armed with a mace of draining +1. In addi- tion to normal damage, this mace will, on command, drain one experience level from the character hit, as a wight. It can only absorb a total of three levels. After those levels are used up, it becomes a normal mace + 1.

Note that Elwyn has superior strength, which gives her an additional +1 to damage on any attack.

Elwyn’s spells are as follows:

1st level: cause fear, darkness (used)
2nd level: blight, hold person
3rd level: curse

Most of these spells are contained in the D&D® Expert Set.

Cause fear is the reverse of remove fear. It will make any one creature flee for two turns. This reversed spell has a range of 120 feet.

Darkness is the reverse of light. It creates a circle of darkness 30 feet in diameter. Elwyn has already used this spell on the altar.

Blight is the reverse of bless. It places a —1 penalty on enemies’ morale, hit rolls, and dam- age rolls. Each victim may make a saving throw vs. Spells to avoid the penalties. It affects all crea- tures within a 20 foot square area, and lasts for six turns. Elwyn casts this spell on the party when they first leave the altar. The DM should make a secret saving throw for each party member before they reach Elwyn.

Hold person affects human or human-like beings. Each victim must make a saving throw vs. Spells or be paralyzed for 9 turns. The spell may be cast at a single person or at a group. If cast at a single person, a — 2 penalty applies to the saving throw. If cast at a group, it will affect up to 4 persons (at the cleric’s choice), but with no penalty to their rolls. The paraly- sis can only be removed by its reverse or the dispel magic spell.

Curse is the reverse of remove curse. It causes a misfortune or penalty to affect the victim, Curses ate limited only by the caster’s imagination, but if an attempted curse is too powerful, it may return to the caster! Elwyn is considering a curse to make one of the party's boots turn to glue and stick to the floor. The DM, of course, may think of a more ingenious curse. The victim is entitled to a saving throw vs. Spells against the curse.

Elwyn’s strategy is to cast blight before the Party arrives. She will then cast hold person fol- lowed by curse. Then, she will cast cause fear. Afterward, she will pull out her mace +1 and attack the party. If the black dragon is still alive, she frees it from its chain and it also attacks the

Unaware that the party has acquired a web spell, she is standing in the narrow corridor and can be quickly imprisoned if the party is clever. If the party uses the lightning bolt, they should be careful, because the rebound can cause a great deal of damage to their own side.

Elwyn should be a tough opponent, but not impossible to defeat. She will never surrender. Once she is defeated, the party automatically sees the slightly-open secret door behind her. Just inside the secret door is Elwyn’s treasure: a small wooden chest containing 11 gems (worth a total of 1,650 gp), and 2 pairs of matching bracelets (one worth 1,000 gp each and the other worth 1,100 gp each). Beside the chest is a staff of healing.

The party can use the key on Elwyn's belt to open the iron door between rooms 1 and 2, and exit through the front door, or they can follow Elwyn's secret corridor to the door that leads to the outside.

Following the adventure at Elwyn’s Sanctuary, the adventurers return to Threshold with the bell. Word rapidly spreads about the party’s deeds. For the next week or so, the party will not be able to keep up with the invitations — this is a good time to have the characters drop a few hundred gold pieces for fancy dress, presents for the hosts, and similar items. This also a good time to introduce more NPC con- tacts if the players are interested. Eventually things will quiet down. The bell will be put away pending a decision to build a new shrine in Threshold or return it to Specu- larum (the former will call for a special tax, the latter could lead to a new adventure). At this time the players may either be called in by the Church or receive an unusual dream visit. The first leads to the Caves of Chaos, the second is with an evil temple hidden in some caves near Castellan Keep. The area is filled with human- oids, but the temple must be found and destroyed. The characters must travel upriver past Kelvin by boat, to the military post called Castellan Keep. If they agree, they will receive a letter of introduction from Sherlane.

The trip to the fort, though long, is unevent- ful. The party will leave the boat in a wildemess of wooded hills and complete their journey on foot.

The keep looms atop a sheer-walled mount of stone, reachable only by means of a narrow rocky track. Its gatehouse opens on an outer bailey, which contains stables, barracks, a tavem, a chapel, and similar structures. Through a second gatehouse is the inner bailey and main keep, for- bidden to all except those on official business.

The commander will be polite, but formal. He is worried about giants, not evil temples. He has no time, men or equipment to spare for the concerns of a patriarch in another part of the realm. Supplies can be drawn from the quartermaster at twice list price, subject to availability—and it's a shame you didn’t bring some recruits with you. The interview ends as an aide interrupts with some impor- tant papers to be signed. (If the party is rude, the commander will become Jess cooperative.)

The tavern keeper can give the party the location of the cave complex, which has been pretty quiet lately. Since there are no giants there, patrols have been few. These rumors are available from soldiers in the tavern: 1. Tribes of different creatures live in the caves. 2. All of the cave entrances are trapped. (False) 3. If you get lost, beware the eater of men! 4. “Bree-yark” is goblin language for “we surrender!” (False) 5. There is more than one tribe of orcs with- in the caves.




THE CAVES OF CHAOS

Design: Gary Gygax
Revision: Dave Cook, Harold Johnson, Jon
Pickens, Michael Price, Evan Robinson,
Lawrence Schick, Stephen D. Sullivan
Editing: Mike Carr, David Cook, Harold
Johnson, Jeff R. Leason, Frank Mentzer, Tom
Moldvay, Lawrence Schick, Edward G. Sollers,
Stephen D. Sullivan, Jean Wells
Art: David S. La Force, Erol Otus, Jim Roslof

General Notes: This module, originally titled B2, The Keep on the Borderlands, has been the standard introductory module from the earliest boxed editions of the D&D® rules. The adventure consisted of a detailed Keep, to be used as a base, and a cave complex known as the Caves of Chaos. The latter has been included here.

Cave Maps……………………… 138-139

START: The forest you have been passing through has been getting more dense, tan- gled, and gloomier than before. The thick, twisted tree trunks, unnaturally misshapen limbs, writhing roots, clutching and grasping thorns and briars all seem to warn and ward you off, but you have forced and hacked your way through regardless. Now the strange growth has suddenly ended — you have stepped out of the thicket into a ravine-like area. The walls rise rather steeply to either side to a height of about 100’ or so — dark, streaked rock mingled with earth. Clumps of trees grow here and there, both on the floor of the ravine and up the sloping walls of the can- yon. The opening you stand in is about 200’ wide. The ravine runs at least 400’ west (actu- ally 440’) to where the western end rises in a steep slope. Here and there at varying heights on all sides of the ravine, you can see the black mouths of cave-like openings in the rock walls. The sunlight is dim, the air is dank, there is an oppressive feeling here — as if something evil is watching and waiting to pounce upon you. There are bare, dead trees here and there, and upon one a vulture perches and gazes hungrily at you. A flock of ravens rise croaking from the ground, the beat of their wings and their cries magnified by the terrain to sound loud and horrible. Amongst the litter of rubble, boulders, and dead wood scattered about on the ravine floor, you can see bits of gleaming ivory and white — closer inspection reveals that these are bones and skulls of men, animals and other things. . . .

You know you have certainly discovered the Caves of Chaos.

NOTES FOR THE DM

CAVE AREA MAP: There are woods overlays and rough contour lines shown on the map. These are only for surface movement refer- ence, and once your players are underground you should ignore these markings.

WOODS: The small groves and copses are thick growths, tangled and forbidding. You may, at your option, have characters encoun- ter occasional monsters herein — stirges, humanoids (kobolds, orcs, etc.) from the caves nearby, or the like. Movement through these wooded areas is slow and difficult. Char- acters must move in single file. Even though not shown, there are single trees, shrubs, and bushes elsewhere.

UNDERGROUND: The caves, passages, and rooms of the complex are on different levels.

Passages slope upwards and downwards between the contours, even where stairways are not shown. Areas are rooted by at least 5’ of solid rock.

INTERIORS: Except where noted otherwise, all underground areas are natural or hewn from living rock. All surfaces are rough (and easy to climb for a thief) with small ledges, minor cracks, and small openings, etc.

RANSOMING PRISONERS: Organized tribes can optionally be allowed to take player characters prisoner, freeing one to return to the Keep in order to bring ransom back to free the captives. Set the sums low — 10 to 100 gp (or a magic item which the ransoming mon- ster would find useful) per prisoner. If the ran- som is paid, allow the characters to go free. Then, without telling the players, assume that this success brought fame to the capturing monsters, so their numbers will be increased by 2-12 additional members, and the tribe will also be very careful to watch for a return of the the adventurers seeking revenge for their humiliating captivity. The period of extra alertness will last 1-4 weeks; the increase in numbers is permanent.

TRIBAL ALLIANCES AND WARFARE: You might allow player characters to somehow become aware that there is a constant skir- mishing going on between the goblins and the hobgoblins on one side and the orcs, sometimes with giant allies, on the other — with the kobolds hoping to be forgotten by all, and the bugbears picking off any strag- glers who happen by. With this knowledge, they might be able to set tribes to fighting one another, and then the adventurers can take advantage of the weakened state of the feud- ing humanoids. Be careful to handle this whole thing properly; it is a device you may use to aid players who are few in number but with a high level of playing skill. It will too easy if there are too many players, or if the players do not actually use wits instead of force when the opportunity presents itself.

MONSTERS LEARNING FROM EXPERI- ENCE: Allow intelligent monsters (even those with only low intelligence) to learn from expe- rience. If player characters use flaming oil against them, allow the monsters to use oil as soon as they can find some. If adventurers are always sneaking up on them, have the mon- sters set warning devices to alert them of intruders. If characters run from overwhelm- ing numbers have the monsters set up a ruse by causing a few to shout and make noise as if there were many coming, thus hopefully frightening off the intruders. This method of handling monsters is basic to becoming a good DM. Apply the principle wherever and whenever you have reason.

EMPTIED AREAS: When monsters are cleared out of an area, the place will be desert- ed for 1-4 weeks. If no further intrusion is made into the area, however, the surviving former inhabitants will return or else some other monster will move in. For instance, a troll might move into a minotaur’s cave com- plex (1.), bringing with him whatever treasure he has.

Encounter Areas:

A. KOBOLD LAIR: There is a 2 in 6 chance that as the group enters the cave-like tun- nel, 8 kobolds will come out from hiding in the trees above and attack first. Kobolds: (AC 7, HD 1/2, hp 3 each, #AT 1, D 1-4, MV 40’, Save NM, ML 6). Each carries d8 sp.

Note: 30’ inside the entrance is a pit. There is a 3 in 6 chance that each person in the front rank will fall in unless they are probing ahead. There is a 1 in 6 chance that individ- uals in the second rank will also fall in, but only if they are close to the first rank and the character ahead has already fallen in. The pit is 10’ deep, and those falling in will take 1-6 points damage. The pit lid will close, and those persons within cannot escape without aid from the outside. The noise will attract creatures from areas 1. and 2. Planks for cross- ing the pit are stored at #1., beyond.

1, GUARD ROOM: 6 kobold guards, (AC 7, HD 1/2, hp 3 each, D 1-4). They will throw spears the first round if they have initiative. Each carries d6 sp. One will run to alert areas 4. and 6, The guards will be alerted by loud noises or lights.

2. GIANT RATS (amidst garbage and waste): There are 18 giant rats (AC 7, HD 1/2, hp 2 each, #AT 1, D 1-3 plus disease, MV 40’, Save NM, ML 8). Each time a character is bitten there is a 1-in-20 chance of getting a disease unless a save vs. Poison is made. If the saving throw fails, there is a 25% chance the character will die in 1-6 days. Otherwise the the character will be too sick to adventure for one game month. These monsters are the pets of the kobolds, living off the garbage and waste of their hosts. They will rush to the sound of the trap door closing or battle. They have nothing of value in their lair or on their bodies, but their leader (rat #18) who will be at the back of the pack, a huge fellow (AC 5 due to speed and cunning, HD 1-1, hp 4, #AT 2, D 2-4/2-4, i.e. 1-3 + 1, MV 40', Save F1, ML8) wears a thin silver chain set with 5 small gems (jewelry value 400 gp, chain value 50 gp, each gem worth 50 gp). The weight of a few rats will not trig- ger the pit trap.

FOOD STORAGE ROOM: The door is locked. This place contains various sorts of dried and salted meat, grain, and vegeta- bles in sacks, boxes, barrels, and piles. There are also bits and pieces of past human victims. There is nothing of value here; even the wine in a large cask is thin and vinegary.

GUARD ROOM: Here are 3 very large ” kobold guards with chain mail and bows to fire down the passage at attackers (AC 5, HD 1+1, hp 5 each, #AT 1, D 1-6 MV 40’, Save Fl, ML 6). The guards will hide behind the corner for cover, so all missiles fired at them will be at ~2 “to hit”. Each carries an axe in his belt and a purse with 2d6 gp.

KOBOLD CHIEFTAIN’S ROOM: This huge kobold is equal to a 2 hit dice mon- ster, has 8 hit points, chain mail and shield (AC 4), with a large gem on a great golden chain about his neck (value 1,200 gp). He has the key to the storage room (#3). He hits for 2-8 (2d4) points of damage with a large battle axe. (AC 4, HD 2, hp 8, #AT 1, D 1-8, MV 40’, Save F2, ML 8). There are 5 female kobolds in the room also, (AC 7, HD 1/2, hp 2 each, #AT 1, D 1-3, MV 40', Save NM, ML 8 due to the chief). There are heaps of cloth and bits of bat- tered furniture in the place. Hidden in an old blanket hanging on the wall are 50 gp (sewn into the hem). Each female has dé gp. A locked chest holds 203 cp, 61 sp, and 22 ep.

COMMON CHAMBER: The bulk of the kobold tribe dwells here. There are 17 males (AC 7, HD 1/2, hp 3 each, #AT 1, D 1-4, MV 40’, Save NM, ML 6), 23 females (AC 7, HD 1/2, hp 2 each, #AT 1, D 1-3, MV 40’, Save NM, ML 6), and 8 young (which do not attack). If their caves are invaded, those able will help in its defense. Males have d6 sp each, females d4 sp each; the young have nothing. Amidst the litter of cloth and bits and scraps of odds-and-ends there is a piece of silk worth 150 gp. (If the party does not search, it will not be located.)

DM NOTE: Kobold losses will not be replaced, though injured kobolds will heal. If the attackers hurl oil at the kobolds, they will retreat if possible, rather than suffer damage. (Should they have the opportunity to find any flasks of oil, the kobolds will use them against attacking characters! )

B. ORCLAIR: Upon entering, the party will see that the wall 30’ to the north is deco- rated with heads and skulls (human, elven, dwarven) in various stages of decay. These cheerful greetings are placed in niches that checker about 100 square feet of the sur- face of the wall. Close inspection will show that one is orcish (see g. below). Sounds of activity can be heard from the west, but all is quiet to the east.

Area g: This narrowing area is a guard post, the watcher (Orc: AC 7, HD 1, hp 5, #AT 1, D 1-6, MV 40’, Save F1, ML 8) having a small window-like opening from which he can observe the entrance to the lair. A piece of gray canvas behind gives the impression that the guard’s head is another of the ghastly tro- phies that decorate the wall. If adventurers enter, he will quickly duck down, slipping a goblin head into the place his own was, and alert the orcs at 7.

7. GUARD ROOM: 4 orcs: (AC 7, HD 1, hp 5 each #AT 1, D 1-6, MV 40’, Save F1, ML 8). These guards are armed with spears. Each carries one for hurling and one to melee with. They have d8 ep each. When alerted they will rush to engage intruders, raising a hue and cry when they see them, There is nothing of value in their chamber, only pallets and shabby clothing hanging on pegs.

8. The watcher (g.) will alert the 4 guards here (exactly as in 7. above) who will rush west and then south to flank or surround the intruders threatening area 7. or 9. or approaching their own quarters.

9. BANQUET AREA: There is a great fire- place on the south wall and many tables and benches in this 30’ x 50’ chamber — the table at the north end having a large chair at its head where the orc leader usu- ally holds court. The place is empty of orcs, although there is a small fire of charcoal burning in the fireplace. 

10. COMMON ROOM: Here are quartered 12 male orcs (AC 7, hp 4 each, #AT 1, Save Fl, ML 8) and 18 females and 9 young (who do not fight). The males have 2d6 sp each, the others have nothing of worth. The few furnishings in the room are like- wise of no value.

11. STORAGE CHAMBER: The door is locked. Amidst the stacks and heaps of supplies and goods here (see 3., above), there are 3 shields, 17 spears, and 2 axes in excellent condition (by some quirk of fate). A small crate in the far northeast cor- ner contains a long-forgotten light cross- bow and 60 bolts. There is nothing else of value in the place.

12. ORC LEADER’S ROOM: This large creature is clad in chain mail, has a magic shield +1, and carries a mace. He fights as a4 hit dice monster, has 15 hit points, and adds +2 to damage he causes when suc- cessfully striking an opponent (thus, 3-8 points of damage) due to his strength and skill. He carries 31 gp, and wears a ring set with a gem (total value 700 gp).

The room is carpeted, has tapestries upon the walls (note one of these covers the entrance to the small cave to the west), and battered but still serviceable furniture and a cot. His two mates sleep on cushions at the foot of his resting place. The two females in the place fight as males (HD 1, hp 3 each, #AT 1, D 1-6, Save F1, ML 8), and each has 2d6 gp on her person. The chests and other furniture have nothing of value.

If hard pressed, the leader will wiggle behind the tapestries on the south wall and attempt to work the catch on the secret door to the south and go to the rival tribe for help, but his very life must be in great peril before he will do so. (Adventurers can only spring this catch by rolling a 1 (on a d6) twice in a row, or having two characters do so simultaneously.)

Areat: This alcove is used by the orc leader to store arms and treasure. There are two complete suits of chain mail here (man- sized and dwarf-sized), 4 swords, and a locked iron chest which holds 205 cp, 386 sp, 81 gp and 13 pp. A small niche in the back wall, with a boulder in front covering it, hides a potion of healing and a scroll with a 6-die fire ball spell on it.

(DM Note: Orc losses cannot be replaced, but after an initial attack by adventurers, four of the males at location 10. will move to area 9., arm themselves with light crossbows, and lay an ambush for intruders. If the leader is slain, all surviving orcs from this locale will seek ref- uge with the tribe at C. (see below), taking everything of value with them, and B. will thereafter be deserted).

C. ORCLAIR: Similar to the orcs at area B., these monsters inhabit cave areas 14-16. These orcs, however, do not rely upon a continual watch being kept; instead, they have a series of nearly invisible strings run- ning across the entry passage, about 11’ from the entrance. When any of these strings is tripped, a heavy, weighted net suspended from the ceiling will drop upon the intruders, and metal pieces tied to it will create an alarm sound. (The trip strings will be spotted only if careful obser- vation is asked for, each observer having a 1 in 6 chance of seeing the devices. The cam- ouflaged net is 10’ wide and 18’ long, made of thick tarred ropes, and will entrap the victim for 1-4 rounds. Meanwhile, orcs from area 14. will be there in 1 round …)

13. FORGOTTEN ROOM: Only the two orc leaders (from this area and from B.) know of this place. They secretly meet here on occasion to plan cooperative ventures or discuss tribal problems, for although the separate tribes are not exactly friendly, both leaders are aware of the fact that there is strength in numbers. A small table and two chairs are in the middle of the room. A wooden chest to one side holds a bow, a quiver of 20 arrows, 2 swords, and 2 dag- gets. Two shields are hung on the south wall. There are only odds and ends other- wise, except that in the southeast corner, hidden beneath an old bucket (which is filled with black, stagnant water) are two small pouches, each holding one gem of 50 gp value, 10 gp, and 20 sp. Nesting under these small pouches, are 2 giant centipedes: (AC 9, HD 1/4, hp 2 each, #AT 1, D illness, MV 20' Save NM, ML 7).

14. COMMON CHAMBER: Here are quar- tered 9 male orcs with shields and swords (AC 6, HD 1, hp 3 each, #AT 1, D 1-6, Save F1, ML 8) and 8 females and 3 young who do not fight. The males have d20 sp each, the females d4 cp, the young have nothing. The place is a mess, and there is nothing of value in it. The males will go to the entrance if they hear the net falling, arriving in 1 round.

15, COMMON HALL: General meetings are held here, and food is likewise cooked and eaten here. There are 6 males here, 2 with light crossbows (AC 6, HD 1, hp 3 each, #AT 1, D 1-6, Save Fl, ML8) and 4 females (non-combatant), dwelling in the western forepart. Each has treasure on their person equal to 14. above. The males here will also go to the entrance if they here the noise of the net falling, arriving in 3 rounds.

16. LEADER’S ROOM: A guard (g.) is always posted just inside the door, and he cannot be surprised. (Orc: AC 5, HD 1+1, hp 6, #AT 1, D 1-6, Save Fl, ML 8, carries 246 sp and d4 gp.) He immediately shouts an alarm if any intruders attempt to enter. Behind him are stacks of barrels and boxes and sacks — extra supplies for the tribe. (One small wine barrel, 400 coins in weight, contains a good quality wine worth 55 gp.) None of the other items here have value, and the foodstuffs are not up to human standards.

The area to the east houses the leader (AC 2, HD 3, hp 16, #AT 1, D 1-6, Save F3, ML 10). He is a very large orc who wears plate and carries a shield, uses a sword, and attacks as a 3 hit dice monster. At his belt is a magic axe +1 which he can hurl at an opponent, and he can do so and still attack normally in the same round of combat. His belt is of silver, with a gold buckle (total value 160 gp), and his sword has a 100 gp gem set in its pommel. In his purse are 8 gp, 17 ep, and 5 sp. His mate is equal to a male orc in combat (AC 7, HD 1, hp 5 #AT 1, Save Fl, ML 10), and she has a bracelet of ivory which is worth 100 gp. The area is well furnished, and a small chest of drawers contains a sack with 50 pp tied shut with a rope of climbing. There is also a copper bowl, finely wrought and chased with silver, on a small table near the bed. It is filled with garbage and very tarnished, so it looks only as if it were worth 10 sp, rather than the actual 50 gp, unless it is closely inspected.

(DM Note: Orc losses cannot be replaced. If this tribe is attacked, they will have the males at area 15. watching the entrance, ready for a second try by the adventurers. If the leader is slain, the survivors will seek safety in area B., if possible; otherwise, they will flee the place entirely, carrying their goods away.)

D. GOBLIN LAIR: The natural cave quickly turns into the worked stone tunnels typical of this whole complex. The passageways here are very busy, and for every 10’ dis- tance covered by the party there is a 1 in 6 chance that they will encounter a group of goblins (see below). Check each time the party travels 30’ (a 3 in 6 chance) until wandering goblins are encountered, then check no further. When an encounter occurs, the entire bunch of goblins will attack and cry out an alarm (Bree-Yark!) at the same time. Wandering goblins are in addition to those found in numbered afeas.

Wandering Goblins: 6 males, (AC 6, HD 1- 1, hp 3 each, #AT 1, D 1-6, MV 20’, Save NM, ML 7). Each will have d6 sp. (They are patrol- ling and carrying messages back and forth. The group will also be carrying several bags (d6) of fairly good foodstuffs — not worth much, but quite suitable for human fare.)

17. GUARD CHAMBER: 6 goblin guards with several spears each (AC 6, HD 1-1, hp 3 each, #AT 1, D 1-6, Save NM, ML 7) are alertly watching both passages here for intruders of any sort, including hobgoblins from the south. They each have d4 x 10 cp and d4 sp. The chamber has a barrel with 60 small spears, a small table, 2 benches and a keg water.

18. GUARD CHAMBER: This is the same as 17., above, except the goblins watch mainly to the east. If there is a cry of “BREE-YARK” (“‘Hey, Rube!”’), two of these guards will rush to the secret door, toss a sack with 250 gp in it to the ogre (E.,22., below) and ask him to help them. The ogre will accept payment and will enter the goblin’s lair and move to attack intruders immediately, if possible. The sack of gold coins is hidden in a water bar- rel in the corner by the secret door.

19. COMMON ROOM: There are 10 males (AC 6, HD 1-1, hp 3 each, #AT 1, D 1-6, Save NM, ML 7) and 12 females and 6 young (who do not fight) dwelling here. Food is prepared and eaten here, and gen- eral meetings are likewise held here. There are heaps of bedding, tables, stools, benches, etc. all around the whole place, making it very cluttered. Each male has d6 sp, each female has 2d6 cp. If the wander- ing group of goblins has not been encoun- tered when the adventurers enter this area, be certain to have those 6 additional males in this chamber.

20. CHIEFTAIN’S ROOM: The goblin leader (AC 4 due to chain mail and shield, HD 3, hp 11, #AT 1, D 2-7 due to strength and skill, Save F3, ML 9), 3 guards (AC 5, HD 1+1, hp 7 each, #AT 1, D 1-6, Save F1, ML9 due to presence of chief), and sev- eral females are quartered here. The chief and the guards have bows hung on the wall, and if there is time, they will take them down and use them. If hard pressed, 2 of the female goblins can fight as well as males, and will do so (AC 7, HD 1-1, hp 2 each, #AT 1, D 1-6, Save NM, ML 9 due to the presence of the chief); the other females do not fight. The chief has a purse with 18 gp and 2 pp in it; each of his guards has 8 ep and dé sp. There is a silver cup (value 90 gp) under his bed.

This place has quite a bit of furniture in it — all scaled goblin-size, of course. A low bench near the bed has a secret drawer door under the seat, and inside is stored the treasure of the goblins: a tapestry with silver and gold threads which is worth 900 gp. Nearby is a stand with a pewter bowl which holds 273 sp and 321 cp.

21. STORAGE CHAMBER: Note that at position g there are 4 goblin guards on duty (AC 6, HD 1-1, hp 4 each, #AT 1, D 1-6, Save NM, ML7) armed with ready crossbows and swords. Many bales, boxes, crates, barrels, and sacks are stacked and heaped in the large chamber. They contain cloth, food, beer, and wine — all of no special worth. The hard-working but not- too-bright goblins continually bring sup- plies of stolen and looted goods to this place. They do not realize that their large cousins, the hobgoblins at area F., below, use a secret door known only to them to steal the best foodstuffs and drink. If the adventurers stay in this chamber for more than 1 turn, a party of 4 hobgoblins will come through the secret door:

4 Hobgoblins: AC 6, HD 1+1, hp 6 each, #AT 1, D 1-8, MV 30’, Save Fl, ML 9). Each carries d4 gold pieces.

(DM Note: Goblin losses cannot be replaced. If they are being soundly defeated by intruders, the goblins will attempt to hide or flee east. Those who do so will go from area 17. to area 23., inform the hobgoblins, and join forces with them, so adjust encounters appropriately.)

E. OGRE CAVE: Persons entering this place will notice a strong, sour odor and then notice what appears to be a huge bear sprawled asleep in the southwest part of the cave. This is nothing more than the skin of a huge bear which the ogre killed and uses as a bed, making it comfortable by heaping leaves underneath. The ogre sits in the eastern portion of his lair, and noises will certainly bring him ready to do battle. This huge ogre has AC 4, due to another thick bearskin he wears for protec- tion. He strikes opponents for 3-12 (1d10 + 2) points of damage (AC 4, HD 4+1, hp 25, D 3-12, MV 30’, Save F4, ML 10). The ogre has grown wealthy by serving as a mercenary — generally on the side of the goblins (and their occasional allies, the hobgoblins), although he has been bought off by the orcs and gnolls from time to time. He will rush to aid the goblins when they toss him a sack of coins (see 18., above). If anyone offers him a greater fee — one which he can actually see and feel — it is 90% likely that he will simply take it (and the goblin’s money too!), and return to his lair.

22. The ogre sits here on top of a great leath- er bag. In this bag are seven large sacks which contain:

#1; 287 sp; #2 a hard cheese; #3: 182 cp and 91 ep; #4: 289 gp; #5 a keg of brandy (value 80 gp); #6: 303 cp; #7: 241 gp (actually lead coins with a wash of gold, so value of each is only 1 copper!).

If intruders offer him a bribe of 20 or more gold piece value, the ogre will be 90% likely to allow them to leave unmolested, but if he catches them again, he will attempt to kill them, whatever the offers. Hidden under a heap of old bones in the southern portion of his cave are 6 magic arrows +1, a potion of invisibility, and a magic scroll with 2 clerical spells — cure light wounds, find traps.

F. HOBGOBLIN LAIR: Seldom are these fierce creatures troubled by marauders, for the entrance to their lair is guarded by a stout, barred door at the back of the entry cave. Skulls are lined along the walls, and several are affixed to the oaken door to highlight a warning written in common runes: “Come in — we'd like to have you for dinner!” (Which could be misinter- preted as a cordial invitation to dine.   ) Careful inspection of the barred door has a 1 in 6 chance per person examining it of detecting a secret mechanism which allows

23.

24.

#i:

#2:

a person outside to slide the bar back so the portal can be entered. If it is forced open, it will require three 1s (on a d6) to break the bar, and the noise will alert the six hobgoblins in area 26. If a knock spell is used to open the door, the noise of the fall- ing bar will be heard, but the guards will not have time to react — the intruders will have two rounds before the guards come.

COMMON ROOM: This place quarters 5 males (AC 6, HD 1+1, hp 5 each, #AT 1, D 1-8, MV 30’, Save F1, ML 8) with d4x 10 sp each: 8 females (AC 7, HD 1, hp 4 each, #AT 1, D 1-6, MV 30’, Save Fl, ML 7) with 2d6 sp each, and 3 young which do not fight and have no treasure. There are heaps of cloth and skins for beds, some odds and ends of furniture, a small barrel of beer, buckets, etc. in the place, all worthless. The males are watching the east door which communicates with the goblin lair (D., above) and are battle-ready.

TORTURE CHAMBER/PLAYROOM/ FOOD STORAGE: There are 2 very large, ugly hobgoblins here. Each is equal to a 2+1 hit dice monster, one having 10 hit points, the other 8 hit points, and both wear chain mail (AC 5). One also has a whip, as well as a sword, so that he can strike at opponents up to 15’ distant, and if a hit is scored, the whip will jerk the vic- tim off his or her feet for and stun (para- lyze) him or her for 1-2 melee rounds. However, once closely engaged the hob- goblin cannot make use of his whip, so he will cast it aside. Each of these monsters has a purse with d6 cp, sp, and ep. The larger also has a silver armlet worth 135 gp. They guard 6 prisoners who are chained to the walls. There are two chairs, a small table, a central fire pit, and various imple- ments of torture in the chamber. The keys to the prisoners’ chains are hanging on the wall in the southwest corner. The prisoners are:

A plump, half-dead merchant, sched- uled to be eaten tonight in a special banquet. If he is rescued and returned to the Keep, the Guild will pay a 100 gp reward, grant the rescuers honorary Guild status, and exempt them for one year from any fees, dues, taxes, and the like which the Guild would normally collect.

An orc (AC 7, HD 1, hp 4, ML 8) who will fight goblins and hobgoblins glad- ly, if handed a weapon (of course, he

#3:

#4:

#5:

#6:

25.

26.

27.

will seek to escape from the adventurers at first chance, taking whatever he can with him, and informing his fellows at B. (above) of what happened).

A man-at-arms (AC 9, Fl, hp 5, ML 7) who formerly served as a guard for the merchant. He will take service with res- cuers for 1 year if an offer is made, for room and board only, if given armor and weapons,

A normal female, the merchant's wife, in fact, who is also slated for the big feast. She will personally reward her res- cuers by giving them a magical dagger +1 she has in her room back at the Keep.

A crazy gnoll (AC 9 due to no armor, HD 2, hp 9, #AT 1, D 1-6, Save F2, ML 8) who will snatch up a weapon and attack his rescuers if he is freed. (He will cause only 1-6 points of damage due to his weakened condition.)

Another man-at-arms as #3 above who will behave the same way his companion will.

COMMON CHAMBER: This large place is used for meals, meetings and gen- eral revels of the hobgoblin tribe. There are many tables and benches set out now, as the place is being readied for the coming feast. 4 males (AC 6, HD 1+1, hp 5 each, # AT 1, D 1-8, MV 30’, Save F1, ML 8), 5 females (AC 7, HD 1, hp 4 each, #AT 1, D 1-6, Save Fl, ML 7), and 9 young (who will not fight) are working here. Males have d4 gp each, females have 2d6 sp. The head table has a set of pewter dishes on it, and their value is 25 gp for the set.

GUARD ROOM: 6 hobgoblins (AC 6, HD 1+1, hp 6 each, #AT 1, D 1-6, Save F1, ML 8), 3 with crossbows which they'll fire once before dropping and taking their maces for close combat. Each carries d4 each gp, sp, c p. If they hear the door being battered, or the bar falling, all but one will immediately rush to the entry, while the other will alert area 27., and then join his fellows. It takes two rounds for them to reach the entry, and the sixth will join the other guards on round four.

ARMORY: 3 hobgoblin guards (AC 5 due to chain mail, HD 1+1, hp 6 each, #AT 1, D 1-8, Save F1, ML 8) are on duty here at all times. If warning comes, two will move to the door to wait in ambush, and the others will pass through the secret entrance (to area 31.) to alert the chief. Each guard has 2d4 each of sp and ep. In the chamber are the following:

suit man-sized plate mail
suit of dwarf-sized plate mail
suits man-sized chain mail
suits elf-sized chain mail
suits man-sized leather armor
shields
daggers
axe
maces
swords
bows (short)
longbow
crossbows
score arrows (14 arrows have
silver heads)

9 score bolts
51 spears
19 pole arms
42 helmets of various sizes

ROR NE RE ASEYUNWR

ee

Armor-type items are standing or hung from racks. Weapons are in chests or on pegs or racks.

28. STOREROOM: Goods stolen from the stupid goblins are kept here until needed above. There will be a single guard (AC 6, HD 1+1,hp5, #AT 1, D 1-8, Save Fl, ML 8) on duty here at all times. He has 2d8 ep. (If the hobgoblin looting party does not encounter adventurers in area 21., they will also be here: 4 hobgoblins (AC 6, HD 1+1, hp 6 each, #AT 1, D 1-8, Save Fl, ML 8). Each of the four carries d4 gp.

29. GUARD ROOM: 2 hobgoblin guards with crossbows and swords stand here (AC 6, HD 1 +1, #AT 1, D 1-8, Save Fl, ML8.) With them are 2 females who will fight (AC 7, HD 1, hp 4 each, #AT 1, D 1-6, Save Fl, ML 7). Males have 2d6 each sp and cp, females have no treasure. There are two cots, a bench, a stool, and a large box (filled with soiled clothing) in the room. If attackers are seen, one female will alert area 30., the other area 31.1; then both will fight.

30. HOBGOBLIN CHIEF’S QUARTERS: This great ugly creature is particularly tough (AC 2 due to plate and shield, HD 5, hp 22, #AT 1, D 3-10 due to strength and skill, MV 30’, Save F5, ML 10). He has 5 pp and 31 gp in his purse. He wears a sil- ver and gem studded belt (value 600 gp).

With him are 4 large female hobgoblins, each equal toa male (AC 6, HD 1 +1, hp6 each, #AT 1, D 1-8, Save Fl, ML 10 due to the chief), and each has 2d6 gp. The room is crowded with furniture and junk — all of no real worth, except that there is a false bottom in a huge iron box filled with man- gy animal skins. The secret portion of the iron box holds 25 pp, 200 gp, 115 ep, and 400 sp plus a 100 gp gem and a potion of poison. Amidst a heap of kindling wood near the fireplace (southeast corner) there is concealed a wand of paralyzation, with only 17 charges left.

31. GUARD ROOM: 4 hobgoblins (AC 5 due to chain mail, HD 1+1, hp 5 each, #AT 1, D 1-8, Save Fl, ML 8), each with 2d6 ep, sp, and cp. They are alert for dan- ger, and when notified, they will pass the word to areas 29., 30., and/or 27., as required. The room is rather bare, having only two pallets, a stool, and a large water barrel.

DM NOTE: As usual, hobgoblin losses can- not be replaced during the course of normal play, which is a period of only several days or weeks of action. The hobgoblins are fairly smart, well-organized, and alert. If their chief is killed, they will typically seek to escape alive, unless their opponents are obviously weak and inferior, Survivors will reinforce the goblins at D., above, unless their attackers are very dangerous and the hobgoblins can see that the whole Caves’ area is in trouble.

G. SHUNNED CAVERN: Even the normal inhabitants of this area, including the ogre, stay away from here, for the creatures that dwell herein are exceptionally danger- ous. Any creature foolish enough to ven- ture out at night becomes fair game. A horrible stench is noticed as soon as crea- tures enter the cavern area.

32. EMPTY GALLERY: The odor of these places is awful. Bones and rotting corpses are spread here and there amidst a litter of dead leaves and old branches. If a careful search is made, adventurers will find a coin every round: 1-2 = 1 cp, 3 —41 sp, 5-61 ep. The sound of such searching might bring visitors! Roll on the table below for an encounter:
1 Ow! bear from 34., below
2 2-12 giant rats (AC 7, HD 1/2, hp 2
each, #AT 1, D 1-3 plus disease, MV
40', Save NM, ML 8)
3 Gray ooze from 33., below
4-6 Nothing is attracted to the noise

33. SHALLOW POOL: This portion of the cavern is very wet, and all the walls and floor have a sheen from the dampness. There is a large pool of shallow water (as shown), and a few white, blind fish are swimming therein. There is a jewel encrusted goblet worth 1,300 gp in the water. There are 3 gray ooze monsters in this place (only 2 if 1 has already been encountered in a 32., area). Each causes 1- 8 hit points damage on the first round, unless attacking from above, because half of their damage will be taken up in destroying the foot and leg protection of the victim. Thereafter, attacks cause 2-16 points damage, as do any attacks from above (AC 8, HD 3*, hp 15 each, #AT 1, D 1-8 first round and destroys armor, then 2-16, MV 3’, Save F2, ML 12). The pair always in the place are located at the south edge of the pool and the on the ceiling in the southwestern portion of the area. There is only a 1 in 20 chance of noticing either unless a pole or other device is used to prod the area before the pool, or unless two or more torches are held aloft so as to fully light the ceiling area. The third gray ooze will be on the ceiling to the left of the entrance, if present. 

34. OWL BEAR’S DEN: Owl Bear: AC 5, HD 5, hp 30, #AT 3, D 1-8/1-8/1-8, MV 40', Save F3, ML 9). It sleeps in the most southern part of its den, digesting a meal of gnoll it just caught at dawn. If aroused, the beast will roar and rush out, striking with its two great paws, and toothy beak for 1-8 points of damage per hit, with three such attacks per round, i.e. a claw, another clawing attack, and then a snap of its beak. It has no treasure, but amidst the many sticks and bones it sleeps on is a bone tube (1 in 6 chance of noticing it for each person searching the heap, with a check for each once per round) with a protection from undead scroll within it.

H. BUGBEAR LAIR: The group of bug- bears is not numerous, but what it lacks in numbers, it makes up for in strength and cunning. There are signs beside the entrance cave in kobold, orcish, goblin, etc. Each says: “Safety, security and repose for all humanoids who enter — WEL- COME! (Come in and report to the first guard on the left for a hot meal and bed assignment.)”

GUARD ROOM: 3 bugbears (AC 5, HD 3 +1, hp 11 each, #AT 1, D 2-8, Save F3, ML 9) with 2d10 gp each. These crea- tures lounge on stools near a smoking bra- zier that has skewers of meat roasting over the coals. Each will ignore his great flail when intruders enter, reaching instead for the food. Though they do not speak com- mon, they will grab and eat a chunk, then offer the skewers to the adventurers — and suddenly use them as swords to strike first blow (at +2 bonus to hit due to surprise!) unless the victims are very alert. There are two cots in the place and a large gong. If the battle goes badly, one will smite the gong to warn the others in the complex.

36. CHIEFTAIN’S ROOM: This tough old bugbear is equal to an ogre (AC 5, HD 4+1, hp 18, #AT 1, D 3-12 (d10 +2), Save F4, ML 9). He has a pouch holding a key, 29 pp, and three 50 gp gems. With him is a female bugbear equal to a male (AC 5, HD 3+1, hp 12, #AT 1, D 2-8, Save Fl, ML 8, Save F3, ML 9). She has gold ear- rings worth 100 gp. The furnishings of the room are battered and crude, but several pieces of silk are mixed up with the bed- ding, in all 6 may be found; the party will be able to sell them for 20 gp each. There is a gray chest stuck up on a ledge near the ceiling which will only be spotted if the room is carefully searched. It contains 1,462 sp, a 30 pound statue of alabaster and ivory (worth 200 gp) and 2 potions of healing (which will break if the chest is roughly handled). It will take three or four strong characters to bring this down safely. There is a hand axe +1 on the wall, and if the chieftain has the chance, he will take it down and hurl it first, then close for full melee. He knows of the secret door — it is his escape route in desperate situations.

37. SPOILS ROOM: The heavy door is locked and the key is in the pouch of the chieftain (36., above). Inside are a magical shield +1 being used as a tray to hold a heap of dried herbs (catnip, something these particular bugbears relish), various boxes and crates of high quality dried or salted foodstuffs, leath- er hides in a stack, 3 barrels of ale, a tun of wine, and a small keg of oil (20 flask capaci- ty). (If all but the shield and oil are sold at the Keep, the value will be 400 gp.) Breaking the lock or smashing the door will bring guards from 35. and the chieftain and his mate from 36.

38. COMMON ROOM: 3 males (AC 5, HD 3+1, hp 12 each, #AT 1, D 2-8, MV 30’, Save F3, ML 9) with 2d8 each of gp and sp, 7 females (AC 6, HD 2, hp 8 each, #AT 1, D 1-8, Save F2, ML 8), and 3 young bug- bears (AC 7, HD 1, hp 3 each, #AT 1, D 1- 4, Save Fl, ML 7) dwell here. There are piles of bedding and old garments here and there. Blackened by soot, there is a sil- ver urn worth 175 gp near the fireplace, but only close examination will reveal its true value.

39. GUARD ROOM: Watching here are 2 males (AC 5, HD 3 +1, hp 10 each, #AT 1, D 2-8, Save F3, ML 9) with 2d8 gp each and 3 females (AC 6, HD 2, hp 7 each, #AT 1, D 1-8, Save F2, ML 8) each with d10 gp. Each has a spear in addition to nor- mal weapons, so they can hurl this missile and then close to fight hand-to-hand. The- se bugbears tend to the slaves as well as help to guard the entrance to their lair. There are bedrolls, a bench, a long table, a water pail, and sacks of meat scattered here and there in the chamber. Keys to the doors to 40. and 41. are on the wall oppo- site the stairs. Both corridors to the slave pens have meal sacks and small boxes and barrels of provisions and watered wine along their length.

40. SLAVE PEN: The iron door is secured by a bar, achain, and a heavy padlock. Inside is a litter of straw, a bucket, and the follow- ing slaves: 3 kobolds (AC 9, HD 1/2, hp 2 each, MV 40’, Save NM, ML 6), 1 goblin (AC 9, HD 1-1, hp 3, MV 20’, Save NM, ML 7), 4 orcs (AC 9, HD 1, hp 5 each, MV 40', Save F1, ML 7), and 2 human fighters (AC 9, Fi, hp 4 each, MV 40, ML 7) — optionally add 1 dwarf (AC 9, D2, hp 12, MV 40’, ML 8) and 2 elves (AC 9, HD 1+1, hp 7 each, MV 40’, ML 8) in place of 2 of the kobolds and 1 of the orcs. They are chained to the wall with a common chain and a heavy padlock. All will fight against the bugbears if given weapons. (Treat as AC 9 unless protection is provided.) The humans will serve as those noted in F.,24., above. The dwarf and elves, if used by the DM, may agree to help the adventurers as long as they stay in the Caves’ area contin- uously and fight. The other creatures will desert at the first opportunity.

41. SLAVE PEN: Another barred, chained, and padlocked iron door keeps safe the following slaves: 3 hobgoblins (AC 8, HD 1+1, hp 6 each, MV 30’, Save Fl, ML 8), 2 gnolls (AC 8, HD 2, + 1, hp 9 each, MV 30’, Save F2, ML 8), 1 (rebel) bugbear (AC 7, HD 3 +1, hp 14, MV 30’, Save F3, ML 9) and a huge human — a seeming wildman, with mighty muscles, shaggy hair and beard, and staring eyes. He is a Hero (a 4th level fighter). His 18 Strength and +1 for his level give him a total of +4 “to hit” bonus and +3 damage (AC 9 due to no armor, 4, hp 24, #AT 1 at +4, D 4-9, ML 10). He is prone to fits of berserk fury due to his enslave- ment, and if armed and in combat it is 50% likely per round that he will strike a friend instead of a foe in his lust to slay! If freed, these slaves will attempt to flee, although they will attack bugbears who are in the way of their escape. There are two exceptions: the big bug- bear hates his fellows, and will take arms and fight against them or any other inhabitants of the whole area; he will continue to do so for as long as the party stays there. The hero is chaotic and evil; once he is armed, and after the battle madness leaves him, he will either kill the adventurers who freed him to have all their treasure for himself, or else he will steal what- ever is most valuable and then sneak off — but only if he knows the party is too strong for him.

(DM Note: There are 2 bugbears out hunting, and they will return with a human corpse and 83 gp the day after adventurers first enter the bugbear lair. They will be placed on guard duty at 35., if appropriate, and their statistics are the same as the guards there. Bugbears will stay in place until all are dead, save the chief- tain, who will seek help help from the mino- taur I.,45.)

I. CAVES OF THE MINOTAUR: This laby- rinth houses a number of nasty things, but the worst is a fiendishly clever minotaur who abides herein. Immediately upon entering the place, adventurers will feel slightly dizzy — the effects of a powerful spell which will cause them to lose all sense of direction.

The minotaur will agree to help the bugbears against invaders at the cost of one human slave every three days of service — of course, the slave is eaten in that period. The minotaur keeps only the choicest of treasures, tossing unwanted loot to whom- ever happens to find it at the mouth of the labyrinth.

(DM Notes: You may allow players to find a few low-value coins, normal equipment, weapons, or armor at the entrance. After 30’ past the cave mouth, the spell of direction confusion will begin to function, so start to misdirect them by naming incorrect directions, i.e. southeast instead of northeast, east instead of west, etc.

Don't worry about calling the same passage as a different direction should they travel over the same route twice — that’s the effect of the magic on them. You may wish to allow the mapping character a secret saving throw every couple of turns, a 19 or 20 indicating that effect has been thrown off.)






42. STIRGE CAVE: There are 13 of these
flying monsters here: (AC 7, HD 1, hp 3
each, #AT 1 at +2, D 1-3 the first round
plus 1-4 per additional round, MV 60’,
Save Fl, ML 9). After an opponent is hit,
the stirge will automatically suck blood
each round thereafter, doing 1-4 hit points
of damage until the victim is dead or the
stirge is killed. The minotaur loves to catch
and eat these creatures, so they avoid him,
and they are quite hungry. In fact, this
hunger makes it 90% likely that they will
be squeaking and hooting to one another,
so the party won't be surprised. They have
No treasure.

43. FIRE BEETLES: Three dwell in this area:
(AC 4, HD 1+2, hp 7 each, #AT 1, D 2-8
(2d4), MV 40’, Save F1, ML 7). They, too,
are hungry and will hasten to attack any
persons entering this area. They have no
treasure, but two glands above their eyes
and one in their abdomen will glow with a
red light, 10’ radius, for 1-6 days after the
beetle is killed.

44, FIRE BEETLES: There are 2 of these
creatures here, in all respects like those in
43., above.

45, THE MINOTAUR: This huge monster
has AC 4 due to a great chain mail coat he
wears, and carries a magic spear + 1(AC 4,
HD 6, hp 35, #AT 1 or 2, D 4-9 or 1-6/ 1-6,
MV 40’, Save F6, ML 12). When he
attacks, the minotaur first rushes and stabs
with the spear for 4-9 points damage
(d6+3 due to his strength). The next
round he will gore and bite for 1-6 points
of damage for each successful attack. The
minotaur may only use his spear or his
horns and bite.

When intruders enter the area, the
minotaur immediately moves to attack. He
knows this area so well that the only way
for victims to escape is to go through the
secret door into area 36., or else to run out
of the place and climb a large tree.

The cave the minotaur dwells in has
skulls and bones arrayed in decorative pat-
terns. The secret door is actually a slab of
stone which takes not less than 3 humans


 

to move. (It will be noticed by careful
checking of the walls, but discovering how
it is moved requires a roll of 1 on a six-
sided die to find where it can be grasped.
All of the minotaur’s treasure is behind
this slab of rock. It hides:

locked chest (with poison needle in
lock) — contents 930 gp and 310 ep
staff of healing

man-sized (optionally elf-sized) magic
plate armor +1

locked coffer — contents 3 potion bot-
tles (gaseous form, delusionary heal-
ing, giant strength)

locked chest — contents 3 pieces of jew-
elry worth 1,600 gp, 900 gp, and 600
BP, respectively

GNOLL LAIR: The entry into this place is
a small cave — and only at the end will
worked stone be visible. If the adventurers
have a light or make too much noise, the
gnoll guards (46.) will certainly be alerted
and ready.

46. GUARD ROOM: There are always 4

gnolls (AC 5, HD 2, hp 9 each, #AT 1,
D 2-8, MV 30’, Save F2, ML 8) on duty
here. Two have bows, will shoot at
intruders until melee takes place; they will
then run for help while the other two
fight. Each gnoll has d8 each ep, sp and cp.

47. GUARD ROOM: 3 males (AC 5, hp 8

each, #AT 1, D 2-8, MV 30’, Save F2, ML
8) and 5 females (AC 6, HD 1+1, hp 5
each, #AT 1, D 1-8, MV 30’, Save Fl, ML
7) are quartered here. They will be ready to
fight immediately. The males have d6 gp
each, the females have d4. There is a scat-
tering of rude furniture in the place, heaps
of bedding on the floor, several hides and
pelts on the walls (one is a valuable sable
cloak worth 450 gp), and a barrel of water
in the southwest corner of the room.

48. LOCKED ROOM: This chamber is a

store room and armory. Besides the usual
provisions, there are 7 shields, a suit of
dwarf-sized chain mail, 12 battle axes, 3
longbows, 5 quivers of arrows (20 in each),
and a magic sword (—2 cursed). One bar-
rel of exceptionally fine ale is leaking and
the odor will tempt adventurers to taste it.
It is so good, in fact, that there is a 5 in 6
chance per taste that he or she will draw a
healthy draught and then spend the next
1-4 turns drinking. (If this occurs, be sure
that you have the appropriate characters

sing, make noise, and act foolishly. Any of
their attacks will be at —2 to hit; this will
continue for as many turns as they spend
drinking i.e. 1-4).

49. COMMON ROOM: This place quarters
the gnoll tribe — 6 males (AC 5, HD 2, hp
8each, #AT 1, D 2-8, MV 30’, Save F2, ML
8), 11 females (AC 6, HD 1 +1, hp 5 each,
#AT 1, D 1-8, MV 30’, Save Fl, ML 7), and
18 young who do not fight. Males have dé
each of ep and sp, females d10 sp each.
There is the usual clutter of worthless fur-
niture in the room.

50. GNOLL CHIEFTAIN’S QUARTERS: The
gnoll leader wears pieces of plate mail (AC 3,
HD 3, hp 17, #AT 1, D 4-10 (2d4 + 2) due
to his strength, Save F3, ML 10). With him
are his two sons (AC 4 due to chain mail and
shield, HD 2+1, hp 10 each, #AT 1, D 3-9
(2d4 +1), Save F2, ML 10), and 4 females
(AC 6, HD 1+1, hp 5 each, #AT 1, D 1-8,
MV 30’, Save F1, ML 9). The chieftain has a
pair of silver armbands worth 50 gp each,
and there are 39 gp in his belt pouch. His
sons have d10 each gp, ep, and sp. Each
female wears as silver neck chain worth 30 gp
and has 2d6 ep in addition. The furnishings
of the place are crude and battered. A large
metal pot beneath a flagstone in the fireplace
alcove hides 200 cp, 157 sp, 76 ep, and 139

The secret door and passage to area K.,
63., is unknown to all parties. Just inside
the entrance is the skeleton of a human
thief; his leg broken, he must have died
here trying to escape through the secret
door. The rotten leather armor and corrod-
ed weapons are valueless, but the purse at
his belt holds 12 gems of 50 gp base value
each, and the elven boots upon his bony
feet are still in usable shape.

(DM Note: Losses by the gnolls cannot be
replaced. They have a loose alliance with the
ofcs, so any surviving gnolls will move to the
orc areas and vice versa. If you wish, allow the
chieftain to be able to escape by climbing up
the chimney of the fireplace in his area.)

K. SHRINE OF EVIL CHAOS: A faint, foul
draft issues from the 20’ wide cave mouth
which is the entrance to this place. The
worn path through the copse of obscenely
twisted and oddly bloated trees gives those
approaching along its length an eerie sense
of unease, and as soon as they enter the
cave mouth a dim awareness of lurking evil
will pervade their senses. Red strata inter-

4B

twines with bulging black veins running
through the hewn rock walls beyond the
entrance. The wide corridors and chambers
are deathly still. A faint groaning sound,
and a shrill piping may be occasionally
heard, barely perceptible even if the party
is absolutely silent and listening.

The floors are smooth and worn by the
tread of countless feet of the worshipers at
this grim place. The footsteps of intruders
will echo alarmingly in these vaulted halls
(+2 chance of being surprised if no pre-
cautions are taken), and extreme care must
be taken to muffle such sounds if the party
has any hopes of remaining undetected
until the moment of their choosing. Con-
tinual noise will bring a group of zombie
guards to investigate:

8 zombies: (AC 8, HD 2, hp 8 each, #AT 1,

D 1-8, MV 30’, Save Fl, ML 12). These
ghastly monsters are clad in filthy red and
black striped uniforms. Each carries a
cleaver-like battle axe. (Each wears an
amulet of protection from turning, so
attempts by a cleric to turn them are made
as if they were ghouls rather than zom-
bies.)

BOULDER FILLED PASSAGE: Large
rocks and boulders have been placed here
in order to seal off this tunnel. It will take
100 man-turns to open a way large enough
for a human to pass through into the area
beyond (possibly outside and southwest of
the Caves of Chaos).

HALL OF SKELETONS: This unusual
audience chamber has a dais and throne-like
chair set with 4 large red gems (500 gp each)
at the south end. It is otherwise empty except
for a dozen skeletons, clad in rags of chain
mail and bearing battered shields and rusty
scimitars, propped against the walls. These
bony guards do not move, and any attempt
to tum them immediately upon entering the
chamber will have no effect, as they are obvi-
ously not animated. However, as soon as
intruders touch the dais or throne chair, these
monsters will spring into action from their
positions on either wall of the chamber. Each
has an amulet of protection from turning on
it, so they are turned by a cleric as if they were
zombies, (AC 7, HD 1, hp 3 each, #AT 1, D
1-6, Save Fl, ML 12). They have no treasure.

Once the skeletons are disposed of, it is
an easy task to pry the 4 garnets (gems)
from the back of the chair.


 

53. GUARD ROOM: There will always be 8
zombies (AC 8, HD 2, hp 8 each, #AT 1,
D 1-8, Save Fl, ML 12), turned as if they
were ghouls due to amulets of protection
from turning hulking silently here, 4 at
either end of the hall. Anyone entering
will be attacked unless they are robed (see
area 54., below) and have an amulet iden-
tical to the ones which the undead guards
or priests wear. There is no treasure here.

54. ACOLYTES’ CHAMBER: There are 4
acolytes (1st level clerics) here (AC 5, C1,
hp 4 each, #AT 1, D 1-6, ML8), all dressed
in rusty red robes with black cowls. Under
these robes, each wears chain mail and a
mace at his belt. Each carries 10 gp in his
purse, and the leader wears an amulet of
protection from good. This amulet circles
the wearer with a magical barrier against
attacks by characters or creatures of other
alignments by subtracting 1 from the “to
hit” rolls of these opponents and adding
+1 to the wearer's saving throws. The
amulet will also keep out melee attacks
from enchanted (magical) monsters (such
as gargoyles), but not missile attacks from
these creatures. Their room contains four
hard pallets, a brazier, a table, four stools,
acabinet for clothing, a water pail, a waste
bucket, and a flagon of wine and four
cups. There is nothing of value amongst
these items.

55. EVIL CHAPEL: This place is of red
stone, the floor being a mosaic checker-
board of black and red. The south wall is
covered by a huge tapestry which depicts a
black landscape, barren trees, and uniden-
tifiable but horrible black shapes in silhou-
ette — possibly demons of some sort —
holding aloft a struggling human. A gray
sky is torn by wisps of purple clouds, and a
bloody moon with a skull-like face upon it
leers down upon the scene. Four black pil-
lars support the domed ceiling some 25’
overhead. Between these columns, just in
front of the tapestry, is a stone altar of red
veined black rock, rough-hewn and
stained brown with dried blood. Upon it
are 4 ancient bronze vessels — a shallow
bowl, a pair of goblets, and an ewer, a vase-
shaped pitcher. They are also bloodstained
but obviously worth a great deal of money.
(The value is 1,000 gp for each cup, and
2,000 gp for each of the other items, but
these are relics of evil, and any character
possessing them will not part with them or
sell them nor allow others to handle them.
For each character who picks up one of the-

se objects, the DM should roll a secret sav-
ing throw vs. Spells at —2. Any who save
successfully will get a “feeling of great
evil” about the object, and he or she may
voluntarily put it down. If the save fails,
the characters will rapidly fall under the
influence of a demonic spell and within 6
days become a servant of chaos and evil,
returning to this chapel to replace the
relics, and then staying as a guard forever
after. If someone attempts to destroy these
relics, the great bell (see 58., below) will
sound and the Shrine’s residents will come
running in 3 rounds. If a detect evil spell is
cast upon these items, they will glow an
ugly purple, and all good characters will
feel an instant loathing for them. If the
character who has taken them has a dispel
magic and then a bless spell cast upon him
or her, there is a 60% chance of removing
the evil on the first day, 50% on the 2d,
40% on the 3rd, 30% on the 4th, 20% on
the 5th, and 10% on the 6th. Otherwise,
nothing will be able to save the character!).

56. ADEPTS’ CHAMBER: There are 4
adepts (2nd level clerics) here, each clad in
a black robe with a maroon colored cowl
(AC 2, C2, hp 8 each, #AT 1, D 1-6, ML
8), wearing plate mail beneath their gar-
ments, and each bearing a mace. Their
waists are circled with copper chains (worth
40 gp each) with skull shaped clasps fash-
ioned of bone. Each carries a purse with 20
gold and 5 platinum pieces, and each
wears an amulet of protection from good,
which makes their effective armor class 2
vs. good creatures. The first and second
have cause light wounds spells (does 2-7
points of damage to creature touched; nor-
mal ‘‘to hit” roll must be made to touch
victim), the third a light spell, the fourth a
cause fear spell (the victim touched must
save vs. Spells or flee in terror for 1 turn; a
normal “to hit” roll must be made to
touch victim). They will use their spells
first, if possible, before engaging in com-
bat with weapons. In the room are four
beds, four small stands, a table, four
chairs, four chests for clothing, and various
books and scrolls of evil nature — nothing
of value. However, on the table are copper
dishes and vessels (total weight 300 gp) of
exceptional craftsmanship which are worth
175 gold pieces. (If the party opts to
destroy the evil writings, they should
receive an additional 600 experience points
for the act, unless they are themselves evil,
in which case they should receive points for
keeping and reading these works.) If hard

a4

pressed, these evil clerics will attempt to
flee and warn their master by striking the
great bell (58.).

57. HALL OF UNDEAD WARRIORS:
There are four files of the undead here,
two of 10 skeletons each, two of 10 zom-
bies each. The former face south, the latter
north.

20 skeletons: AC 6 (due to chain mail rags &
shields), HD 1, hp 3 each, #AT 1, D 1-6, Save
Fi, ML12, turned as zombies.

20 zombies: AC 5 (due to chain mail), HD 2,
hp 8 each, #AT 1, D 1-8, Save Fl; ML 12,
turned as if they were ghouls.

Upon the striking of the great iron bell at 58.
below, the skeletons will issue forth from the
south door of the place and march into the
temple (58.) to line the south wall, while the
zombies plod out the north exit to line the
north wall of the temple. If intruders enter
toom 57., are in the passage to the temple, or
are within the temple itself. these undead
warriors will attack. Proper garments and
amulets warn by the characters will prevent
attack unless the cleric commands the undead
to do so. They have no treasure.

58. TEMPLE OF EVIL CHAOS: This huge
area has an arched ceiling some 30’ or more
in height. The floor is of polished black stone
which has swirling patterns of red veins
through it. The walls behind the draperies,
and the ceiling as well, are of dull black rock,
while the west wall is of translucent red stone
which is seemingly one piece, polished to
mirror-like smoothness. A great bell of black
iron stands near the entrance point, with a
pair of mallets beside its supports. To the
south are several long benches or pews. There
are three stone altars to the west: the north-
west of pure black, the middle one of
streaked red and black, the last of red with
black flecks. At the western end of the tem-
ple area is a dais of black stone, with four
lesser chairs on its lower tier and a great
throne above. The chairs are of bone; the ivo-
ty throne is set with gold and adored with
gems of red and black (10 black stones each
worth 100 gp, 10 red stones each worth 500
gp, and one large red stone worth 1,000 gp).
The signs and sigils upon these seats are of
pure chaos and evil. The other walls are cov-
ered by draperies of deep purple with
embroidered symbols and evil sayings, done
in scarlet and gold and black thread. As soon
as the party enters the place, black candles in


 

eight great candelabras on either side of the
place will come alight magically, shooting
forth a disgusting red radiance. Shapeless
forms of purple, yellow and green will dance
and sway on the western wall, and if anyone
looks at them for more than a moment, they
must save vs. Spells or be mesmerized into
chanting a hymn to chaotic evil. Should three
or more voices be so raised, the iron bell will
sound automatically by magic, but even one
such chant will alert the guards of the head
cleric (see below). Zombie guards will enter
here in 3 rounds after the party, even if the
party is quiet.

59. THE CHAMBERS OF THE EVIL
PRIEST: Location 59.g is the anteroom
where special visitors are entertained by
the chief cleric. There are lavish furnish-
ings here, although none are of particular
value except for a golden flagon and cups
(flagon worth 500 gp, each of the nine
cups has 100 gp value). Three zombies are
on guard here (AC 2 due to plate mail and
shield, HD 2, hp 13 each, #AT 1, D 1-8,
Save Fl, ML 12). They stand unmoving
unless they are summoned by a chant from
the temple area, someone enters their area,
or they are commanded by the evil priest.

Location 59. is the private chamber of
the evil priest. He is 3d level, wears magi-
cal armor +1, has a shield +1, and wears
an amulet of protection from good which
adds a further +1 to his armor class when
attacked by good creatures (AC 0 or —1,
C3, hp 14, #AT 1, D 2-7 (staff) or 1-6
(mace), ML 10). He attacks with a snake
staff, which is +1 to hit. On command,
the staff will turn into a snake and coil
around a person hit. The victim is held
helpless for 1d4 turns, or until the cleric
recalls the the staff. The staff then crawls
back to the cleric on command. He also has
a normal mace hanging from his belt. He
has a gold ring with a black gem (value
1,400 gp) and a purse with 51 pp in it. He
wears a black cape and cowl, with red robes
beneath. His spells are: cause light wounds
(inflicts 2-7 points of damage) and cause
fear. The priest must touch the intended
victim, and successfully roll to hit, for the
spells to take effect. He also has a scroll
with three cleric spells on it: detect magic,
hold person, silence, 15’ radius. He has a
potion of gaseous form which he will use to
escape through the boulder-filled corridor,
51., when all else fails.

His room is furnished lavishly, with red
carpet, furniture of black wood with velvet
upholstery of scarlet, and a large bed cov-

ered with silken covers of black and red
cushions and pillows. A demon idol leers
from the wall to the north, directly over
the be bed. If anyone other than the priest
touches it, it will topple over upon the
character, causing 2-12 points of damage.
It has two gem eyes (100 gp value each).
The evil priest will dart behind a screen in
the southeast corner, enter a wardrobe
there, slip through a secret door in its back,
and then down a short passage and out
into the corridor through another secret
door, should his life be in danger. When
the secret door in the back of the wardrobe
is opened by the party, 500 gp and 50 gems
of 10 gp value each will spill from the
wardrobe into the room to hopefully cause
pursuers to stop for the loot. The priest will
meanwhile either try to rally his forces, or
else escape (assuming that most of his fel-
lows have been eliminated already).

60. GUEST CHAMBER: This lower room is

for important guests of the place. It con-
tains a large bed, table, chairs, etc. There is
nothing of value within, although the tap-
estries adorning the walls (things picturing
evil cruelties and obscene rites) appear
expensive. Beneath a velvet cloth on the
table is a polished mirror.

TORTURE CHAMBER: There are vari-
ous implements of torture here, both large
and small — a rack, iron maiden, tongs,
pinchers, whips, etc. Comfortable chairs
are scattered along the walls, evidently so
placed to allow visitors an enjoyable view
of the proceedings. The torturer lives in
the forepart of the place, and he will attack
unauthorized persons who enter. He is a
3rd level fighter, hp 19, with chain mail
under his black leather garments (AC 5,
F3, hp 19, #AT 1, D 3-8 (1d6+2 due to
Strength), ML 8). His weapon is a huge
axe. Hidden in his mattress are 135 gp and
a bracelet worth 700 gp.

62, THE CRYPT: The door to this room is

bolted shut. This long hall is of roughly
hewn stone, with a low ceiling. In it are
many coffins and large sarcophagi with the
remains of servants of the Temple of Evil
Chaos. The sixth tomb opened will contain
a wight: (AC 5, HD 3*, hp 13, #AT 1, D
drains one level, MV 30’, Save F2, ML 12).
There is a secret compartment in the
wight’'s tomb; this contains a sword +2a
scroll of protection from undead, a helm of
alignment change, and a silver dagger
worth 800 gp because of the gems set into



its pommel.

63. STORAGE CHAMBER: There are many

piles of boxes, crates, barrels, sacks, and so
forth here — the supplies of the temple.
There is nothing of value, and if the party
stays within the place for longer than 3
rounds, a gelatinous cube will move from
the corridor into the place and block it:
(AC 8, HD 4*, hp 22, #AT 1, D 2-8, plus
paralyzation, MV 20', Save F2, ML 12).
Inside the creature are d12 each of cp, sp,
ep, gp, and pp, as well as several bones —
evidently parts of a victim not yet wholly
digested. (One of the bones is actually a
wand of enemy detection with 9 charges
left. If it is not gotten out of the monster
within one turn, it will be ruined by diges-
tive juices.) The secret door in the room
leads to the gnoll chieftain’s cave. (50.,
above).

64. CELL: The door is of iron, locked and

barred, but a window is set in the door.
This is the place where prisoners are kept
until tortured to death or sacrificed in the
area above. There are several skeletons still
chained to the wall, and one scantily clad
female — a fair maiden obviously in need
of rescuing! As she is partly around a cor-
ner, at first only her shapely legs and body
up to the shoulders can be seen. Those who
enter and approach closer are in for a rude
shock! This is actually a medusa recently
taken by the evil priest's zombie guards.
(AC 8, HD 4**, hp 20, #AT 1, D 1-6 plus
poison, MV 30’, Save F4, ML 8). An oppo-
nent hit by the medusa’s attack has been
bitten by the asp-hair and must save vs.
Poison or die. Those looking at the crea-
ture — including those fighting her from
the front — must save versus being Turned
to Stone by the medusa.

Not being above such things, the cleric
had plans for removing its snakes, blinding
it, and then eventually sacrificing it at a
special rite to a demon. The medusa will
spare one or two of the adventurers from
her gaze, promising them she has magic
which will turn their companions back to
flesh again, if they will free her from her
chains. She does, in fact, have a special
elixir, a potion of stone to flesh in a small
vial, enough liquid to turn six persons back
to normal, but she does not intend to give
it away. If freed she will attempt to
“stone” her rescuers.


THE SILVER PRINCESS

 

 

Unlike the other adventures in this book, this
one begins when an Immortal intervenes
directly in campaign affairs. Thus, the adven-
ture of the Silver Princess can occur at any time
the DM desires.

Direct contact with an Immortal is an unusual
and highly significant affair. Special care should
be taken to impress the players with the signal
and wonderous trappings of such contact.

The Immortal

An immortal is a superior being, seldom seen,
who influences and manipulates campaign
events in pursuit of higher goals. Some are
benign, some are malevolent, but all te to
work indirectly. In this adventure, the party

be contacted by Thendara, Morden ft Va
ley of Haven, whose words are given at the
beginning of the Silver Princess adventure.

The party can be anywhere at the time of
the contact. First, they will experience a chill
wind, although there will be no visible signs
(even torches will not flicker). Motion outside
the party starts to slow, and their surround-
ings become hazy and indistinct. Other peo-
ple and creatures seem to stop, and the party’s
own motions become dreamlike and slow. A
glow of light appears, growing and finally
resolving into a tall woman with dark brown
hair and faintly green skin. Her features have
a slightly elvish cast. She has no weapons they
can see, but an aura of power overlayed with
gentleness emanates from her. As she smiles,
the light that surrounds her expands to sur-
round the party and they discover they can
move freely within it. Upon close examina-
tion, the being seems slightly transparent. At
this point the adventure begins.

If any of the party accepts the Immortal’s
offer, all will be instantly transported to the pal-
ace of the Silver Princess. Any wounds will be
instantly healed, and spell casters can rechoose
spells if they wish. Effectively, they will be start-
ing a new adventure at full strength.

Note: This encounter can be used to save a
party that faces total destruction. However,
such intervention must remain very rare if the
players are to remain the driving force in your
campaign. Think carefully about the effect of
such intervention on play before you decide to
use it—players lose interest if the DM pulls
them out of trouble every time they foul up.
Save this for a time when they play well, but
are beaten by poor luck (though this, too, is
part of the game!) If you do use this encounter
to save the party and they won't accept it, let
them take the consequences.

i ead
eR gee]
aro
Dene Peete tetera ete)

Design: Tom Moldvay and Jean Wells
Development: Allen Hammack, Harold
Johnson, Tom Moldvay, Brian Pitzer, Jean
Wells

Editing: Allen Hammack, Harold Johnson,
Jon Pickens, Deborah Richie

Art: Jim Holloway, David S. La Force, Harry
Quinn, Jim Roslof, Laura Roslof, Stephen D.
Sullivan, Bill Willingham

Playtesting: Ken Reek, Jo La Force, Dave La
Force, Judy Elvin, Skip Williams, Dave Con-
ant, Shirley Egnoski, Ernie Gygax, John and
Mary Eklund, Michael Luznicky, Blane Fuller,
Jan Kratochvil, Mark Teloh, John Beckman,
Bob Burgess, John Main, Gregory G. H.
Rihn, Doug Jones, Bryan Wendorf, Tina
Pacey, Rocky Bartlett, and Helen Cook

Special Thanks To: Frank Mentzer, Skip Wil-
liams, “Col.” Steve Austin Morely, John
Laney, Robert Cole, Kevin Woods, and Tony
Earls, and to Harold Johnson and Walt Wells
for inspiration.

General Notes: An early version of this mod-
ule has become a rare item; the later version
has been adapted for this collection. The spe-
cial programmed introduction has been
replaced by boxed text, but this adventure is
presented intact.

| eg ea ee lA Te aU 140-141

 

Player’s Background (Read to
players)

This is narrated by the Protector, when she
appears to the players:

 

“The valley of Haven was a peaceful
land. Its crops were abundant, its citizens
prosperous. Elves, Dwarves, Halflings,
and Humans lived together in harmony.
Hidden away in the heart of the Altan Tepe
Mountains, Haven was a safe place to live.
The rivers were sweet and pure; the weath-
er was pleasant and warm.

“One reason Haven was so peaceful was
due to my presence. I am Thendara, and I
am known to the people of the valley as the
Protector. I am an Immortal and patron of
the valley. For years without number I have
warded off evil and helped the crops to
grow and the valley of Haven to prosper.
Hear now the tale of Haven.

“The ruler of Haven was the fair Princess
Argenta. She lived in a palace made of
white shining marble, which, when the
sun set, glowed like silver. Princess Argen-
ta was beloved by all her people. She was
just, fair and friendly to all.

“One day, the dwarves of Haven found a
ruby the size of an apple while digging in a
new mine. As a token of their devotion, they
gave the ruby to Princess Argenta. The
dwarves named the ruby “My Lady’s Heart”.
The princess was so pleased with the gift that
she invited all the valley to attend a celebra-
tion to see the wondrous gem. The dwarves
were to be the guests of honor. It was to be a
grand day of feasting and fun.

“The day before the celebration a
strange visitor arrived. He flew into the
valley riding a white dragon. The rider was
dressed all in black. He had pale skin, long
blond hair, and a short blond beard. Since
Haven was noted for its hospitality, the
princess invited the stranger to stay at the
palace. She also granted his request to
escort her to the celebration.

“At midnight, disaster struck. Dark
clouds hid the moon and a freezing wind
blew through the valley. The crops with-
ered in the fields. Cattle grew sick. The
valley began to die. I could do nothing.

“From the palace came an explosion and
parts of the walls came tumbling down.
When the dust cleared a ruby glow sur-
rounded the entire palace.

“Haven now lies in chaos. Raiding
bands of orcs, goblins, and hobgoblins ter-
rorize the countryside. The disaster hap-
pened so suddenly that the people are con-

 

 

 


 

 

fused and helpless. Without their leaders,
who are trapped in the palace, they have
no courage to fight back. The situation has
become desperate.

“Haven is in dire trouble. I do not know
what caused the disaster, but I do know
that the reason can be found somewhere in
the palace. Allies of the evil that has
attacked Haven have challenged me and I
am under siege. I cannot help Haven, but
you can. The princess needs you; the peo-
ple of Haven need you. You are Haven’s
only hope. Find the source of the evil that
has overtaken Haven, and destroy it. If you
will go, I will open the way into of the pal-
ace for you. I will also give you all the help
Ican, but my power is limited. The future
of Haven is in your hands.”

“Please decide quickly, my time here is
nearly ended. Already evil forces have detect-

 

 

ed my sending. Will you come now?”

 

Dungeon Master’s Background

The disaster that has struck Haven has been
caused by the magical ruby that the dwarves
found. While it was called “My Lady’s Heart”
by the people of Haven, its true name is ‘The
Eye of Erik”’.

Arik is an ancient, evil being of great power.
He is also known as Arik of the Hundred Eyes,
and is sometimes worshipped as a god. For his
many crimes, Arik was banished to a special
dimension centuries ago to be imprisoned
there for all eternity.

Arik has been seeking to escape from the
prison dimension through the ages. And he
desires to take over Haven and enslave all its peo-
ple. He has at last managed to send one of his
eyes across the dimensional barriers into the
heart of the mountains. There, the dwarves
found Arik’s ruby eye and brought it to the pal-
ace, not knowing the evil they were bringing to
their beloved valley. The ruby, though larger
than most gems, looks like any other ruby and
though the Protector would have sensed the evil,
by the time the ruby’s influence was felt, it was
too late. Arik had already struck.

The ruby is linked to Arik. It has allowed
him to channel some of his evil magical power
past the dimensional barriers into Haven and
the power of the ruby attracts evil, chaotic
monsters. Arik hopes to use the ruby “eye,”
when the time is right, to open the way and
cross the dimensional border.

The power of the ruby has killed the crops
and brought disease to the animals. It has
drawn orc, goblin, and hobgoblin hordes into
Haven to fight for its master. It has even
brought the evil cleric, Catharandamus into

the palace, to prepare the ceremony that will
allow Arik to cross the dimensional barriers.
The ruby has turned many of the palace
inhabitants to stone and trapped the princess
and the mysterious stranger inside itself.
Finally, the ruby has created a magical field
around the palace to prevent help from arriv-
ing and stopping Catharandamus.

The Protector will open a way through the
ruby glow, and will also open a safe passage out,
if the party chooses to leave the palace to rest and
recover spells and hit points. The Protector will,
however, state that it is a drain of power and the
way can only be opened a few times.

Ellis the Strong and Ariksbane

The mysterious stranger in black armor who
arrived just before the disaster struck is named
Ellis the Strong (AC 2; F 3; hp 21; #AT 1;
D 1-10 +3; MV 20’; ML9; ALL; $18, 19, W12,
D13, C16, Ch15). Ellis is a Knight of the White
Drakes, a special band of fighters from Thyatis
who ride white dragons and are dedicated to
defeating evil wherever it exists. The characters
have heard stories of them. He wears black plate
mail armor and wields a two-handed sword. His
dragon steed is known as Ariksbane (AC 3; HD
6; hp 30; #AT 3; D 1-4/1-4/2d8; MV 30’, Fly
80’; ML 8; ALN). Ellis and Ariksbane came to
Haven because they had heard of the great ruby
and suspected that the ruby was one of the leg-
endary eyes of Arik. Before they could be sure,
they were caught by the power of the ruby and
defeated. Ellis is now trapped inside the ruby
with Princess Argenta. Ariksbane has been ban-
ished to another dimension.

Destroying the Ruby

The party must, at some point during the
adventure, discover or figure out how to
destroy the ruby Eye of Arik. There are several
clues and aids throughout the dungeon. How-
ever, if through bad luck the party appears to
be missing most of these, ‘‘a vision from the
Protector” can be used to give hints to steer
them in the right direction.

There are three ways that the party can
destroy the ‘Eye of Arik” and defeat the evil.
The name Ariksbane means “the ruin of
Arik.” And if the dragon is freed it can use its
frost breath, if the dragon wishes, to destroy
the ruby without harming anyone near the
ruby (or trapped inside it). The ruby can be
shattered by using the Sword of Arik, if this
can be found. Catharandamus is using the
sword as part of the ceremony to free Arik. If
the sword is used to shatter the ruby it will be
destroyed at the same time. Finally, two notes
played on the Ice Harp will summon the min-
strel Rowena (see room 32). Rowena is one of



the legends of Haven. She was a famous min-
strel who left Haven years ago to visit the Pro-
tector. Time does not flow the same with the
Protector as in the rest of, the world. Though
she has lived with the Protector for many
years, she is little older than the day she left
Haven. Rowena knows the proper notes to
play on the Ice Harp to shatter the ruby.

If the ruby is destroyed, by any one of the
three possible means, the evil curse which has
befallen Haven will be lifted. Those people
turned to stone by the ruby will return to nor-
mal. Princess Argenta and Ellis the Strong will
be freed and return to normal size. If Ariks-
bane has not already been freed, the dragon
will be freed when the ruby is destroyed. The
hordes of chaotic monsters invading Haven
will flee in terror. The crops will grow again
and the animals will be cured. A grateful Prin-
cess Argenta will reward the characters with a
special medal of honor plus 3,000 gp each.

DUNGEON LEVEL ONE

The DM may expand on the detail of this
adventure by describing what rooms and
items found look like: what do the floor and
walls look like, what are they made of, what is
in the room? He or she may also wish to
change or add things to this dungeon. But be
careful that any changes made do not make
the dungeon too dangerous or give the players
treasure that makes them too powerful.

WANDERING MONSTERS

Every other turn, the DM should make a check
for a wandering monster. A roll of 1 on 1d6
indicates an encounter has occurred. The
monster will first be seen 20-120 (2d6x10) feet
away when encountered, though the monster
may surprise the party by stepping through a
door, or waiting around a corner. Use the spe-
cial table given below to determine the type of
monster encountered.

Acolyte: Acolytes are 1st level NPC clerics.
The acolytes encountered as wandering mon-
sters will all be clerics of Arik. If there are 4 or
more encountered they will be led by either a
2nd or 3rd level cleric. To determine which,
roll 1d6. A roll of 1-4 indicates a 2nd level
leader. A roll of 5-6 indicates a 3rd level lead-
er. The DM can choose any clerical spells for
the leader, or they may be rolled at random.

The clerics of Arik all wear blood-red robes
with large hoods that hide the faces of the cler-
ics. The robes are decorated with 100 eyes.
Beneath the robes the clerics wear plate mail.
They all carry shields painted with a single
large red eye.


 

Wandering Monster Table: Level 1 (Roll 1d6)

Die Wandering

 

Roll _ Monster AC HD Damage MV Save ML_AL
1 Acolyte 1-8 2 1 1-6 20° Ci 7 CC
2 Bandit 1-8 6 1 1-6 400 TL Bl. G
3 Bear,Black 1 6 4 1-3/1-3/1-6 40' F2 7 N
4 Kobold 4-16 ib 1/2 1-4 40". NM 6 C
5 Orc 2-8 6 1 1-6 30° Fi 8 6C
6 Skeleton 3-12 7 1 1-6 20° Fi 12

Bandits: Bandits are NPC thieves who have
joined together to rob others. Bandits will act as
normal humans, lost and wandering in the pal-
ace, to surprise their intended victims. These
particular bandits have been drawn to Haven by
the Eye of Arik. If the DM chooses, the bandits
may be led by a 2nd or 3rd level thief.

Bear, Black: Black bears have black fur and
stand about 6’ tall. They are omnivorous (will
eat almost anything), but prefer roots and
berries. A black bear will not usually attack
unless it is cornered and cannot escape. This
particular black bear has wandered into the
caverns below the palace and was trapped
there by the red glow from the ruby. The bear
is extremely hungry. If the party gives him
food, he will not attack.

Kobold: These kobolds have been attracted by
the “Eye of Arik.” They hope to join in the loot-
ing and pillaging when Arik takes over the valley.
Orcs: These orcs have gathered to fight for Arik
when he finally enters Haven. They will help any
clerics of Arik, if the clerics are in trouble.
Skeletons: The Eye of Arik has released hordes
of undead usually kept away by the Protector.

PLAYER’S START

 

Approximately a half-mile from the palace
you can see that part of the structure’s left side
has been destroyed. Stone blocks and rubble
cover the mountain side. Almost all of the cas-
tle and many parts of the surrounding land
glow a soft red. All plant life, except some
strange-looking thorn bushes with white roses,
has died where the ruby glow radiates.

As you travel closer to the palace, a trail
untouched by the ruby glow appears. The
trail leads directly to the entrance of the
palace. The main entryway into the palace
is the only part of the palace that does not
glow red. The massive, barred portcullis
that usually blocks the entrance is raised.

There is a quick, furtive movement to your
right, as your party startles a rat near the
entrance. The small beast darts out into the
glowing area, suddenly stops, shakes a bit,
and dies. You notice the remains of other
small unfortunate creatures inside this red

 

 

zone.

 

Any player characters who enter or touch the red
area must make a save vs. Spells. If successful,
the character takes no damage. If unsuccessful,
the character takes 1-6 points of damage. A new
saving throw is required each round the charac-
ter is in the red area. Evil creatures of Arik are
immune to the effects of the red glow.

If the player characters search the entrance,
they will find a small, almost invisible wire
stretched across the 30-foot wide entrance, 3
inches above the ground. If the wire is tripped
(automatic if the party just walks in without
searching), a small dart shoots out of a con-
cealed niche in the rocks. If there is a target in
the entranceway, the dart will hit a character
on a 10 or better rolled on a 20-sided die,
inflicting 1-4 points of damage.

1, ENTRANCE HALL

 

You pass beneath the raised portcullis and
enter the palace proper. The gateyard is a
large open area surrounded by 20-foot tall
rock walls, running 30 feet from east to
west and 40 long. There are doors to the
east and west, 20 feet from the entryway.
Both doors are made of wood and rein-
forced with iron bars. There are two
smaller portcullises in the south wall, 10’
wide and 20' high. One is set in the west-
ernmost ten feet of the south wall, the oth-
er in the easternmost ten feet of the south
wall. There is 10 feet of solid stone wall
between the two portcullises.

 

As soon as the last character enters the palace,
read the following to the players:

 

As the last member of your band passes
beneath the gates, the portcullis crashes
down behind the party, removing any
chance of escape by that means. The ruby
glow you noted before now covers the path
to the palace and the portcullis, but does
extend into the palace itself.

 

 

 

Any character trying to move the portcullis
will find it will not budge, and will in addi-
tion suffer the effects of touching the red
zone.



Both wooden doors are shut. If the charac-
ters successfully try to hear any noise behind
the door, they will hear scratching and squeak-
ing behind the western door (room 3) and the
slow clank of chains behind the eastern door
(room 4), respectively.

The southern portcullises cannot be raised
by hand, though they will not harm the char-
acter touching them. Each of the portcullises
are marked with the letters “A+B” and an
arrow pointing upward. These refer to the
levers found in rooms 2 and 3. When both
levers in these rooms are in the “up” position,
a grinding noise occurs and the portcullises
will retract into the ceiling, allowing the party
to enter the palace proper.

2. EAST ROOM

 

You open the door to reveal a 20 foot by 20
foot room. There is a lever in the center of
the south wall. At the center of the room is
a 3-foot long gray rat who regards you with
reddish eyes.

 

 

 

There is a single giant rat in the room (AC 7;
HD 1; hp 4; MV 40’; #AT 1 D 1-3 + disease;
ML 8; AL N). It is very hungry. If the party
throws the rat some food, it will ignore the
party and gobble down the rations. Otherwise
it will attack.

The lever in the south wall can be moved up
or down. Its current position is down. The
“up” position is marked by an “A” carved
into the rock. For the effects of this lever, see
room 1. Remember that the gates south will
raise only if both levers are in the “up” posi-
tion.

3. WEST ROOM

 

You open the door to reveal a 20 by 20 foot
room with a large wooden lever in the
southern wall. In the center of the room
are a pair of skeletons. Long iron chains
dangle from their wrists, and they carry
curved swords.

 

 

 

The two skeletons (AC 7; HD 1; hp 5 each;
MV 20’; #AT 1; D 1-6; Save Fl; ML 12; ALC)
are undead, and cannot be affected by sleep or
charm magics, though they can be curned.

The lever on the southern wall is similar to
that in room 2, except that the “up” position
is marked by a ““B” instead of an “A”. If the
levers in this room and room 2 are both moved
to the “up” position, the gates to the south
will raise.


 

4, SECRET ROOM

 

The secret panel slides back to reveal a 10
by 10 room littered with equipment: 2 sets
of chain mail, a shield, a sword, a cross-
bow, and 20 crossbow bolts.

 

 

 

The equipment is in good condition, and was
left by a previous group of adventurers as a
storage cache that they never returned to.

5. LIBRARY

 

Reed pens, dried ink wells, and scraps of
paper litter this large room. There are sev-
eral huge oak tables overturned in the
southeast corner. This room appears to
have been some kind of study, classroom or
library. You do not see any books or scrolls,
however.

 

 

 

Hidden behind the tables is a family of five
kobolds (AC 7; HD 1/2; hp 3 each; MV 40°;
#AT 1; D 1-4; Save NM; ML 6; AL C). If the
party decides to search the room, or they dis-
cover the kobolds by accident, the kobolds
will fight to defend their lair. Otherwise, they
will remain hidden until the danger passes.
Buried in the litter are 50 copper pieces.

6. STOREROOM

 

This room looks like a storeroom. Its
shelves are filled with large sacks. A dozen
barrels are stacked against one wall.

 

 

 

If the players examine the sacks, they will find
the sacks are filled with grain. The barrels are
filled with beer. Except for the stored goods,
the room is empty.

7. PANTRY

 

This area looks like a pantry. Wooden
plates, spoons, knives, and other utensils
are scattered around the room. Broken
pots litter the floor. You see five small,
incredibly ugly, human-like beings open-
ing drawers and cabinets and tossing
things on the floor. The creatures have pale
earthy colored skin. Their eyes are red and
glow in the dark.

 

 

 

The 5 human-like creatures are goblins (AC 6;
HD 1-1; hp 4 each; MV 20’; #AT 1; D 1-6;
Save NM; ML 7; AL C). The goblins are loot-
ing the kitchen for valuables. So far they have
found nothing. As a result, they are very
angry.

Goblins normally live underground. In full

daylight they fight with a penalty of —1 on
their “‘to hit” rolls. Torch light, lantern light
ora light spell is not equal to full daylight and
will not affect them. Goblins hate dwarves
and will attack them on sight.

8. DINING HALL

 

This room appears to be a dining hall.
Seated around a large table are twenty
statues. The statues look like men and
women eating supper. One statue is cut-
ting meat, another is drinking from a wine
cup, and so forth. The food on the table is
not stone. The food is cold and stale, but
no moldy or decayed.

 

 

 

When Arik sent his power to this dimension
through the ruby, his power turned most of
the palace inhabitants into stone statues. This
group of people were eating supper at the
time. There is neither monster nor treasure in
the room.

9. HOBGOBLIN BARRACKS

If the party listens at the door first, they will
hear arguing, which any who speak hobgob-
lins will recognize as that language. No roll for
listening needs to be made.

 

This room holds six beds. Musty, ragged
blankets lie on the beds. Six footlockers
(small wooden chests) rest at the foot of the
beds. A half-dozen creatures sit on the
beds arguing. The six creatures are human-
like and man-sized, though incredibly
ugly. Their skin is an earth color and they
appear very brutish.

 

 

 

The six creatures are hobgoblins (AC 6; HD
1+1; hp 6 each; MV 30’; #AT 1; D1-8; Save
F1; ML8; ALC). The hobgoblins have moved
into the old barracks which once housed the
palace guards.

10. DESERTED BARRACKS

 

This room contains the remains of bunks,
blankets, wooden tables and stools which
have been broken. Five corpses litter the
floor. Two of the bodies are human,
dressed like palace guards. The other three
corpses are of a small human-like race with
grotesque faces and livid gray skin.

 

 

 

This room was a barracks for palace guards-
men. The two dead men had been patrolling
outside the palace when the disaster struck.
They managed to rush back inside before the
red glow surrounded the palace. Unfortu-



nately they ran into a party of goblins who
sneaked into the palace through the lower
caverns and were looting the barracks.

After a short, bloody fight both men were
killed, but not before they killed three gob-
lins. The remainder of the goblins, in a fit of
rage, smashed all the furniture in the room.
The room is presently empty of treasure and
live monsters.

11. CAVERN ENTRANCE

 

Wind whistles softly through this dark
damp cave carrying with it a musky smell.
Straw is scattered about the floor, along
with jagged bones. Chained to one wall isa
large ape with pale white fur. As soon as it
sees you it begins to rattle its chain and
roar.

 

 

 

The white ape (AC 6; HD 4; hp 18; MV 40’;
#AT 2; D1-4/1-4; Save F2; ML 7; ALN) used
to guard the entrance to the caverns. It was fed
regularly and became something of a pet. It
would not attack anyone wearing a guard uni-
form. Unfortunately, the white ape has not
been fed for many days. If the party gives the
ape food, the white ape will not attack. The
ape’s chain is long enough that there is not
enough room to pass without being attacked.

12. OAKEN CABINET

 

An oaken cabinet sits against the west wall
of this hexagonal room. The cabinet is
carved with scenes of springtime in Haven.
The floor of the room is white marble,
veined with black and gold.

 

 

 

The cabinet is filled with pale green towels
and pink bars of soap carved into dolphins.
Hidden under the towels is a spitting cobra
(AC 7; HD 1; hp 3; MV 30’; #AT 1; D 1-3 +
poison; Save Fl; ML 7; AL N). The cobra is
asleep. It will attack if it is disturbed, other-
wise it will remain quiet.

A spitting cobra is a 3’ long, grayish-white
snake that can spit a stream of venom up to 6’.
It aims for its victim's eyes. If the spit hits, the
victim must save vs. Poison or be blinded. If
the DM wishes, he or she can have the cobra
bite, instead of spit poison. The damage
caused (1-3 points) refers only to when the
cobra bites. If the cobra bites instead of spit-
ting, the victim must save vs. Poison or die in
1-10 turns (instead of being blinded). Next to
the spitting cobra is a large golden key worth
150 gp.


 

13. SUNKEN BATH

 

This hexagonal room contains a large sunk-
en bath filled with water. The sunken bath
is made of white marble veined with black
and gold. The walls of this room are lav-
ishly decorated with murals of water
nymphs, ponds with long reeds, and
hunters stalking water birds. In one corner
of the room are seven flasks and a large
peacock feather fan. Flying above the bath
you see five birdlike creatures. The crea-
tures resemble small feathered anteaters,
with long noses.

 

 

 

The 5 birdlike creatures are stirges (AC 7; HD
1; hp 5 each; MV 60’; #AT 1; D 1-3; Save F2;
ML9; ALN). When a stirge attacks a creature,
it thrusts its beak into the victim's body to
suck out blood for 1-3 points of damage. A
successful hit means that it has attached itself
to the victim and will automatically suck
blood for 1-3 points of damage per round
until either it or its victim is dead. If its victim
dies, it will leave. A flying stirge gains a bonus
of +2 to hit on its first attack against any one
opponent, due to its speed.

If the party investigates the seven flasks,
they will find that six of the flasks contain
scented bath oil in different colors. The last
flask is a potion of ESP.

14, PINK PEDESTAL

 

Upon entering this room, the first thing
you notice is a small, pink marble pedestal
five feet tall. Light gleams from a small
object atop the pedestal. The object is sil-
ver in color. Other than the pedestal the
room seems to be empty.

 

 

 

When a character gets within one foot of the
pedestal, a green glow will surround the ped-
estal. In the midst of the glow you see the
transparent face of the Protector. The Protec-
tor warns the party to “Beware!” then disap-
pears along with the green glow.

On top of the pedestal is a small silver pen-
dant on a silver chain. If a character reaches
out to touch the pendant he or she will hear
hysterical laughter which seems to come from
the pendant. Any character who actually
touches the pendant must make a save vs.
Spells or be driven insane. The insanity will
mainly consist of suicidal bravery, always
charging into deadly battles, accompanied by
hysterical laughter. There is no known cure for
the madness (unless the DM chooses to make
one up).

The silver pendant once belonged to
Silverheart, the alchemist. When used by

Silverheart, the pendant was magical because
it contained part of his spirit. The power of
the Eye of Arik warped the magic of the silver
pendant. Through Arik’s evil influence, it
drove Silverheart insane.

Ac the time that Silverheart went insane, he
was in the midst of an important alchemical
experiment. Because of his insanity, the exper-
iment produced disastrous results. The entire
section of the palace (on level 2) where he was
working exploded. Silverheart and those peo-
ple in that section of the palace at the time
were killed. All that remains of the section of
the palace where Silverheart worked is rubble.
The only thing to survive the explosion was
the pendant which was teleported to the ped-
estal by the power of the Eye of Arik. The pen-
dant lies and waits for more victims.

15, MOSAIC ROOM

 

This hexagonal room is decorated with
mosaic tiles. The mosaic covers the entire
room, the walls, the floor and the ceiling.
One scene shows a man in black plate
armor riding a white dragon. A young
woman wearing a golden crown is riding in
front of the man. Another scene shows
elves playing in some woods while a white
dragon watches them from a hiding place
behind two tall pines. On another wall is a
scene showing a pool of bright blue water.
Several mermaids swim and frolic in the
water. The design on the floor shows the
crowned maiden, the man in black armor,
and the white dragon asleep around a key
hole. All the mosaics look new.

 

 

 

Once the party has entered the room, if they
examine the mosaic, the keyhole in the floor
will emit a blue white glow which will last
until a key is placed into the keyhole. If the
players use any key other than the gold key
from room 12, or fail when trying to pick the
lock, a stone slab will fall from the ceiling over
the spot where the keyhole is located. Any
character caught by the stone will suffer 2-12
points of damage.

If the gold key is placed in the keyhole,
another keyhole will appear on the east wall.
The second keyhole is also opened by the gold
key. Once the key is placed in this second lock
and turned, the mosaic, keyhole, and key will
vanish. A long silvery sword, floating in the
air, will appear in their place. The sword glows
with a bright blue white light. If a character
reaches out to touch the sword, the man in
black plate mail will suddenly appear beside
the sword and attack the character attempting
to take the sword. The man will attack like a
10 hit dice monster.



The man is an illusion and will disappear
after 4 rounds or when it is touched by a char-
acter. Touch does not mean hitting it in com-
bat, it means touching the illusion with a bare
hand. Characters hit by the illusion will
believe that they have actually taken damage
and will feel “hurt,” though no damage will
actually be taken. The illusion cannot be hit
in combat.

Once the illusion disappears, the sword will
drop to the floor. It still glows. All characters
will immediately discover that they took no
damage, and characters who may have been
“killed” will discover that they are actually
alive and were only asleep. If the characters
decide to touch the sword again, nothing will
happen to them and the sword will “feel
good” in their hands. The sword will always
glow when not sheathed. There is no sheath
for it in this room, nor will it fit into a sheath
not specifically made for it. The magically
glowing sword is a +1 weapon. It casts
enough light to see for 30’. The weapon
belonged to Ellis. He still wears the sheath (he
is trapped inside the Eye of Arik).

16. STEAM ROOM

 

This room is filled with a thick mist. The
room seems hotter than normal.

 

 

 

The mist is actually steam and is safe to walk
through. This is a steam room. The steam rises
from a geyser underneath the room. Once
inside the room, the party will find that there
are wooden benches along the walls. The
room holds no monsters, traps, or treasure.

17, CAVERN TEMPLE

 

The cavern opens into a large cave. The
cave floor and walls have been polished
smooth. Several statues once rested on a
raised platform along the west wall. The
statues seem to have been of three people
kneeling in front of the Protector. They are
bestowing gifts on the Protector. Now,
however, the statues have been smashed.
In their place is the crude clay statue of a
large eye. The eye has been painted blood
red.

 

 

 

Hidden under the rubble of the broken
statues is a giant centipede (AC 9; HD 1/2; hp
2; MV 20’; #AT 1; D poison; Save NM; ML 7;
ALN). If a character tries to move the rubble
by hand, the giant centipede will be disturbed
and attack. If the rubble is moved from a dis-
tance (with a spear, pole or similar item), the
centipede will scurry out of the room without
attacking.


 

18. UNDERGROUND POOL

 

Most of this cave is filled with a pool of
water. A small ledge circles the pool, run-
ning along the east wall of the cave. The
ledge is only wide enough for one person
to walk along it without falling into the
water. In the middle of the pool you see a
disturbance in the water. There are several
3' long creatures swimming toward you.
The creatures look like weasels.

 

 

 

The disturbance is caused by 3 giant ferrets
(AC 5; HD 1+1; hp 6 each; MV 50’; #AT 1;
D 1-8; Save Fl; ML 8; AL N). Giant ferrets
usually hunt giant rats underground. Unfor-
tunately, they are highly unpredictable, and
they may attack the party if their reaction to
the party is low enough.

The water in the cave is fresh. The pool is
fed by a stream which enters from the south.
The ledge ends where the stream enters the
pool. The party can go no further along the
stream, for it has the same red glow as the land
outside.

19. GREEN SLIME

 

The walls of this room are covered with
green, oozing slime. Except for the slime,
the room appears to be empty.

 

 

 

The oozing slime is green slime (AC can
always be hit; HD 2*; hp 9; MV 1’; #AT 1; D
special; Save Fl; ML 12; AL N). Green slime
can be only harmed by fire or cold; it cannot
be hurt by any other attacks. It dissolves wood
and metal (in 6 rounds), but cannot dissolve
stone. Once in contact with flesh, green slime
will stick and turn the flesh into green slime.
It cannot be scraped off, but must be burnt
off. If it is not burned off, the victim will turn
completely into green slime 1-4 rounds after
the green slime first came into contact with
the flesh. Burning green slime while it is on
the victim causes 1/2 damage to the slime and
1/2 damage to the victim.

20. SULFUR POOL

 

This small cave is largely filled with a bub-
bling gray pool of liquid. The cave smells
foul. The pool is surrounded by coarse red
sand, The sandy ledge surrounding the
pool on the south and west sides, is only
wide enough for one person to stand on
without touching the liquid.

 

 

 

The liquid is water, but the water has a very
high content of sulfur. Because of the sulfur

bubbles, the air here is not safe to breathe for
long periods of time. Anyone staying in the
room for one full turn will begin to feel dizzy.
If they do not leave in the next round they will
take 1 point of damage for each round they
remain in the room without getting fresh air.
If the party searches the room they will find
that some unfortunate individual once fell
into the pool. The victim is now nothing but
bones. The victim clutches a leather bag. The
bag is filled with 133 gp and a silver wolf-
headed ring with two small sapphires for eyes
(worth 300 gp).

21, STOREROOM

 

This room contains shelves along the south
and west walls. The shelves are filled with
wooden crates. Otherwise, the room

 

 

appears to be empty.

 

The crates are filled with iron rations. Each
week's worth of iron rations is packed in a sep-
arate tin. The iron rations were used by the
palace guards when they went on long patrols
through the countryside. Except for the iron
rations, the room is empty.

22. BLOCKED EXIT

 

This area seems to have been in some kind
of explosion or earthquake. Stairs once led
up out of this area. Rubble covers the floor
and blocks the stairs. Through cracks in the
rubble, you catch a faint glimpse of a red
glow outside the palace.

 

 

 

This is part of the area devastated by the alche-
mist Silverheart when he went insane and his
experiment proved a disaster (see room 14).
Though this area is actually below the experi-
mental rooms, it was still caught in the explo-
sion. Even if the characters clear the rubble,
they would still have to face the red glow
which surrounds the palace if they tried to use
this exit.

23. SECRET ROOM

 

Four statues dominate the room, one in
each corner. Each statue is of a young girl
in a different pose. No two statues look
alike. Between the two statues on the east
wall is a plush chair. Four smaller chairs
surround the central chair. A leather-
covered book rests on the central chair.
Between the statues on the north wall you
see a 4’ long beetle with a striped shell
resembling a tiger's skin.

 

 

 

The monster is a giant tiger beetle (AC 3; HD


3+1; hp 15; MV 50’; #AT 1; D 2-12; Save F1;
ML 9; AL N). Tiger beetles are carnivorous
(meat-eaters) and have been known to attack
humans when starving. They attack with a
pair of powerful mandibles. The book on the
chair is the diary of Princess Argenta. It stops
on the day before disaster struck Haven. The
final entry reads:

“Today my love arrived riding his noble
dragon like the great hero he is. He swept me
into his arms and proposed marriage. Natu-
rally I acted reluctant. It wouldn't do to seem
too enthusiastic. But when I saw the forlorn
look on his face I immediately relented. We
kissed, then set the wedding date. We will be
married in two weeks, when Ellis’ service with
the Knights of the White Drakes ends. We
will invite the entire valley.”

This was one of the rooms where Argenta
often went to escape the duties of court life.
When the disaster struck Argenta, along with
Ellis, were magically shrunken and trapped
inside the ruby. Both of them are still alive
and will return to normal if the ruby is
destroyed. The four statues in the room are
Argenta’s ladies in waiting who were turned to
stone when the disaster struck.

24. FOUNTAIN ROOM

 

There is a small fountain of water in one
corner of this room. Tapestries hang along
both the north and south walls; one shows
a scene of a young maiden with golden hair
sitting on a silver throne. Upon her head
rests a crown of silver and rubies. In one
hand she holds a silver scepter and in the
other she holds a large ruby. The other tap-
estry shows a warrior in black plate mail
resting casually in a wooden chair deco-
rated with carvings. His feet are propped
upon a stool.

 

 

 

The two tapestries show Princess Argenta and
the warrior Ellis the Strong. Except for the
fountain, the rest of the room is empty. The
fountain contains only water.

25. ANTEROOM

 

In this room is a 10’ wide semi-circular
alcove. On either side of the alcove stands
the statue of a warrior.

 

 

 

The two statues are actually living crystal
statues (AC 4; HD 3; hp 14; MV 30’; #AT 2;
D 1-6/1-6; Save F3; ML 11; ALL). Living crys-
tal statues are life forms made of crystals,
instead of flesh. While they look just like nor-
mal statues, they are actually living beings.
Whenever this room is entered the DM should


roll a monster reaction (2d6). On a roll of 5 or
less, the statues will attack.

26. SCHOOLROOM

 

The room contains several wooden desks and
chairs. Against one wall is a blackboard.

 

 

 

This room was a schoolroom for the children
in the palace. It is empty of monsters or trea-
sure.

27. TRAPPED PASSAGE

 

This small chamber is more of a passageway
than a room. It is very cramped and there are

 

 

several sets of empty shelves on the walls.

 

The pit trap in the floor of this storage passage
will be activated by the first person to step
onto it, and triggered by the second one who
steps onto it. Once triggered, the floor will
swing open and drop whatever is on it into a
10’ deep pit. The cover will then swing back
and lock shut. Anyone falling into the pit will
take 1d6 points of damage.

If the first person who walks across the trap
door reaches the other side before the second
one tries, only the second person will fall in,
otherwise both will fall in.

After one round, small openings will appear
in the pit walls, and oil will pour into the pit.
The oil will continue to pour forth until it fills
the floor of the pit 1’ deep. Another wall open-
ing will now appear and a torch (unlit) will fall
into the oil. (When the palace was occupied, the
torch would have been lit.)

The pit cannot be opened from inside. It can
be opened from the outside using release mecha-
nisms hidden inside secret compartments on the
inside of either doorway. Check to see if any par-
ty member discovers the secret doors of the com-
partments. The release mechanism is a simple
button that needs to be pressed. The stone cover
will then slide back. If the party decides to try to
smash the stone cover, it will take 10 turns to do
so; roll for wandering monsters five times before
the pit is opened.

28. LIBRARY

 

You see shelves covering most of the walls.
The shelves are filled with books and
scrolls. There are also a number of wooden
tables and chairs in the room. You notice
that the room has more candles to light it
than is usual. The candles are not lit at
present. Against the south wall is a fire-

 

 

place which is also unlit.

 

This room is the palace library. Since the stu-

dents sometimes used the library both day
and night, there are extra candles in the room.

Clinging to the ceiling is a giant crab spider
(AC 7; HD 2*; hp 9; MV 40’; #AT 1; D 1-8 +
poison; Save Fl; ML 7; ALN). Giant crab spi-
ders have chameleon-like powers and can
change their color to blend into their sur-
roundings. They will surprise the party on a
roll of 1-4 on 1d6. After the first attack, a crab
spider can be seen and attacked normally.
Crab spiders are carnivorous (meat-eaters).
Any victim bitten by a crab spider must save
vs. Poison or die in 1-4 turns. However, their
poison is weak, and the victim may add +2 to
the saving throw roll.

If the party searches the books and scrolls
carefully (which will take a full 3 turns), they
will find that one scroll is a magic-user/elf
spell scroll. The scroll contains the second
level spell: web.

29. FITTING ROOM

 

In the center of this room is a folding
screen with three panels. The screen is five
feet high and six feet wide. From behind
the screen you hear a forlorn wailing
sound. Behind the screen you see two
vaguely human shadows. The shadows are
about four and one half feet tall and have
no heads or arms. Their legs are indistinct.
The cerie shadows dance wildly about.

 

 

 

The shadows are caused by a lit lamp behind
the screen, shining on two dressmakers’ dum-
mies. Each dummy has a sleeveless dress on it
ready for alteration. The dummies themselves
are merely carved wooden torsos mounted on
platforms of metal rods so that they stand
roughly the height of a woman. Since the
dummies have no heads or arms they do not
cast shadows of heads or arms. The shadowy
legs are indistinct because of the dress hang-
ing down. The shadows are dancing because a
breeze is blowing through the open door mak-
ing a forlorn wailing sound.

The screen is a dressing screen. Members of
this palace family and their retainers dressed
behind it during fittings. The rest of the room
contains bolts of cloth, ribbons, pin cushions,
needles, etc.

30. BUTCHER’S ROOM

 

The floor of this room is covered with blood-
stained sand. A rack on the north wall holds a
number of large knives and meat cleavers. In
the center of the room is a large wooden
block about 2’ high, 3’ long, and 2’ wide.
The wooden block is also bloodstained.

 

 

This room is a butchering room. Meat is
butchered here, then stored in the ice cavern
(room 31). Underneath the sand is a pit trap
door in the floor. The trap door stands in front
of the butcher's block. Anyone who walks on
the door has a chance of accidently causing it
to open. Roll 1d6 for each character walking
over the trap door. It will open if a 1 or 2 is
rolled. The trap door is used to get rid of
refuse. The door opens to a chute which leads
below to an underground river. Anyone open-
ing the door will fall down the chute to the
river below. The river is only 2' deep, but any-
one falling down the chute will take 1d6 dam-
age from the fall.

The underground river channel is blocked
by a heavy iron grill. Anyone falling into the
river will be swept against the grill by the pow-
erful current. Fortunately the grill is too small
for characters to be swept through.

Three giant rats (AC 7; HD 1/2; hp 3 each;
MV 20’; #AT 1; D 1-3; Save NM; ML 8; ALN)
are also trapped in the underground passage.
They are desperate and in a state of panic.
They will immediately attack. There is a 1 in
20 chance that any one of the giant rats carries
a disease. If an individual is bitten by a dis-
eased rat the victim must make a save vs. Poi-
son. If the save fails, the victim will either die
in 1-6 days or be sick in bed (unable to adven-
ture) for one month. Roll 1d4; the disease is
only deadly on a result of 1.

If the underground passage is searched, the
characters will find the dead body of an unfor-
tunate victim. The body will be only a skele-
ton. The individual was carrying a sack of
mixed coins (10 gp, 8 sp; and 9 cp) plus a jade
ring with dragons carved into it worth 250 gp.

31. ICE CAVE

 

As you walk down the stairs you notice a
rapid drop in temperature. The tempera-
ture is nearly freezing at the bottom of the
stairs. You notice that the walls of the large
cave at the foot of the stairs are covered
with a thin layer of ice. Hanging from
hooks in the ceiling are slabs of meat.

 

 

 

This room is an ice cavern, a natural under-
ground cave which stays cold all year round.
Except for meats and other foods stored here,
the room is empty.

32, ROWENA’S ROOM

 

Upon entering this rectangular room, the
first thing you notice is a tapestry hanging
on the wall; they show scenes from the life
a female minstrel. In front of each tapestry

 

 

 




 

 

is a couch. Pillows of various sizes are scat-
tered on the couches. Empty wine goblets
and wine bottles are piled into one corner
of the room. Decorative candle holders
filled with candle stubs sit on small tables
near each couch. In the center of the room
is a decorative wheel painted on the floor.
The wheel is 5’ in diameter. In the middle
of the wheel is a small lap harp made of
crystal with strings of spun silver.

 

 

 

The crystal harp is known as the Ice Harp. It
belongs to the minstreal Rowena, Rowena is
one of the legends of Haven. Her music was so
melodic that she was invited to live with the
Protector. Time does not flow the same there
as in the rest of the world. Though Rowena
has lived there for many years, she is still a
young woman.

If the party plays two notes on the Ice Harp,
Rowena will appear. She will know about the
Eye of Arik and will be able to tell the characters
what happened to cause the disaster to Haven.
She also knows the proper sequence of notes to
play on the Ice Harp to shatter the ruby. She will
show the party which notes to play.

Rowena cannot remain here for long or her
real age will catch up with her and she will
wither away to dust. She will explain what
needs to be done, then she will return to the
Protector’s realm. If the party attacks her for
some reason, she will return there immedi-
ately. The proper sequence of notes which
destroys the ruby is too complicated for the
party to accidently discover. For the short time
she is in this world, Rowena is protected
against all attacks. Thus it makes no differ-
ence what her characteristics or statistics are.
She will not attack, nor can she be harmed. If
the party attacks her she will leave because she
deems the party unworthy of her help.

The Ice Harp is magical. If the phrase “For
the memory of Rowena” is chanted, the Ice
Harp will play some of her most famous tunes.
Princess Argenta often held parties in this
room. The guests sat and drank wine while lis-
tening to the Ice Harp.

33. ZOMBIE CHAMBER

 

This room has been partly cut from the sur-
rounding rock. The stone work is cruder
than is usual for the rest of the palace. Ona
table in the corner of the room is the small
silver statue of a dragon readying for
flight. In front of the statue, acting as
guards, are five humans. Each human
guard has a gaping wound. The wounds
look serious enough to kill any person who
suffered them.

 

 

 

The five guards are zombies (AC 8; HD 2; hp
9; MV 30’; #AT 1; D 1-8; Save Fl; ML 12; AL
C). Zombies are undead monsters and may be
“turned” by a cleric. They are not affected by
sleep ot charm spells or any form of mind
reading. Zombies are slow fighters and always
strike last in a round (no initiative roll is need-
ed). The zombies are guarding the silver
dragon statuette and will attack on sight and
fight to the death if not rurned (no morale roll
necessary).

The silver dragon statuette is one of three
identical statuettes. On the base of the statu-
ette is the phrase “Ariksbane, Destroyer of
Evil.” If any two statuettes are brought within
30' of the Eye of Arik, the dragon Ariksbane
will be released from his imprisonment and
appear. The dragon's frost breath can destroy
the ruby Eye of Arik without harming anyone
near the ruby (or trapped inside the ruby).

The silver statuettes are worth 500 gp each.
If two of them are used to free Ariksbane, the
statuettes will disappear. Ellis the Strong and
Ariksbane will give the party 1,000 gp to pay
for the statuettes that disappear.

34. CAPTAIN OF THE GUARD’S ROOM

 

This room contains a bed, a small oak
table, a wooden chair, a wooden footlocker
and a pile of papers. The table has been
toppled over, the chair has been smashed
into pieces, the footlocker has been broken
open, the papers are scattered over the
floor, and the bed covers are smeared with

 

 

blood stains.

 

This room used to be the quarters for the cap-
tain of the guard. Just before the disaster
struck, the captain was murdered by one of his
own men. The murderer, Travis, had been
driven mad when he saw the Eye of Arik. He
now serves Arik, leading some of Arik’s orcs.
The papers scattered on the floor are weekly
reports which the guard captain had to fill
out.

35. BARRACKS

 

You see five double bunk beds in this
room. At the foot of each bed are two
footlockers. On the east wall, near one of
the beds, a message has been scrawled.
The letters of the message are too small for
you to read at this distance.

 

 

 

The message has been scratched onto the wall
with the point of a dagger. It reads: “Beware
of Travis.” Except for the beds and footlockers,
the room is empty when the party enters. The
footlockers contain spare guard's uniforms.



The footlockers show signs of having been
searched.

One round after the party enters the room,
the crazed guard Travis will enter. Travis has
been driven insane by the sight of the Eye of
Arik. Travis (AC 3; F 3; hp 16; MV 20’; #AT 1;
D 1-4 (+2) or 1-8 (+2); Save F3; ML 12; AL
C; $17, 113, W9, D12, C15, Ch8) will attack
the party on sight. First he will throw his mag-
ical throwing dagger +2. The dagger is, of
course, +2 to hit. On the second round of
combat, Travis will draw his sword and attack.
He still wears his guard's uniform over plate
mail (hence his armor class of 3).

While Travis fights, he will scream at the
characters, “You'll never get my treasure!
Thieves! Everywhere I look, thieves are trying
to steal my treasure. You all must die! I'll nev-
er let you steal my treasure!”

Travis will fight to the death. The only trea-
sure that can be found on him or in the room
is the magical throwing dagger. The throwing
dagger +2is +2 only when thrown. If used in
melee it is +1.

36. SPY ROOM

 

You see a small room here. The only furni-
ture in the room is a wooden stool. There is
a small spy hole in the secret door that lets
someone inside the room see the corridor
outside. A rope bell pull hangs from a hole
in the ceiling.

 

 

 

This is the room where Travis was hiding. The
room is normally used as a watching post in
times of invasion. The bell rope runs up
through the rock to a bell in room 78. When a
guard pulls the rope, the bell will ring, alert-
ing the court of danger. The room is now emp-
ty. If the party should open the secret door
before going into room 35, Travis will still be
in this room and will attack. (for details of the
encounter see room 35).

37, ARMORY

 

Inside this room you see ten statues of
guardsmen standing at attention. On the
floor is the corpse of a guard captain.
Along the walls of the room are empty
racks which look like they might have once
held weapons.

 

 

 

This room was the armory. The ten statues are
guardsmen who were turned into stone by the
Eye of Arik. The dead guard captain was mur-
dered by Travis (see room 34). The room holds
no treasure nor monsters.


 

38. TRAVIS’ ROOM

39. TRAVIS’ OFFICE

42. CAVE OF THE STATUES

 

As soon as you open the door, the character
who opened the door is attacked by a wild-
eyed wolf.

 

 

 

The wolf (AC 7; HD 2+2; hp 11; MV 60’;
#AT 1; D 1-6; Save Fl; ML 12; AL C) used to
be Travis’s pet dog. When Travis was driven
insane by the Eye of Arik, his dog was turned
into a wolf. Since the dog was magically trans-
formed into a wolf who serves Arik, the ani-
mal has a Chaotic alignment instead of the
usual Neutral alignment for wolves. The wolf
is as insane as Travis. Travis is the only one who
is safe with the wolf. The wolf will attack the
party on sight and fight to the death. It has
heard the party outside the door and was wait-
ing to attack as soon as the door was open.
This is a special case where the DM need not
roll for surprise, and even listening at doors
will not be successful, since the surprise ele-
ment has been determined in advance. It is
still a good idea for the DM to pretend that he
or she has checked for surprise and/or listen-
ing at doors by rolling a few dice. If the party
kills the wolf and looks into the room read
them the following room description:

 

A small bed of fresh straw lies in the north-
western corner of this room. A wooden
plate, a pair of eating knives, and a bronze
wine goblet rest on a table in the center of
the room. Under the table is a wooden
bowl filled with meat. Several old tapes-
tries have been hung on the walls, and bits
of fur and other types of floor coverings
form a makeshift carpet. A lit lantern
hangs over the table.

 

 

 

This is the room where Travis and his wolf live.
Most of the furniture in the room has been
brought here by Travis. The wooden bowl is
filled with food for his wolf. On the east wall,
behind one of the tapestries is a peephole Tra-
vis uses to spy out into the hallway. If the party
has not yet encountered Travis (see room 35),
he will be following them. Travis will attack
the rear of the party on round 2 of the combat
with the wolf. For details of an encounter with
Travis see room 35.

Travis’ treasure is concealed in this room.
His treasure is hidden beneath the bed, under
a loose stone in the floor. The treasure is kept
in a small wooden case. The treasure consists
of two sapphires each worth 300 gp, one large
emerald worth 2,000 gp, and a gold ring with
the initials “DB” carved on the inside. The
treasure once belonged to his fellow guards-
men.

Directly across the room from the door in
the north wall is a huge wooden table.
Behind it is set an ornately carved wooden
chair. On the table is a candlestick, a feath-
ered quill pen, and several pieces of parch-
ment.

 

 

 

Travis used to hold court in this room. He
would review his orc troops here. Since Travis
had seen his captain fill out reports, he too has
filled out reports on the condition of his
troops. But Travis does not know how to write
his reports, and they are a meaningless jumble
of scribbles which no one can read (except Tra-
vis). The room is empty of monsters and trea-
sure.

40. ORC BARRACKS

 

This room holds four double bunkbeds.
Seated on the beds are eight human-like
creatures who look like a combination of
animals and men. Despite their weird
looks, the creatures are all wearing the uni-
forms of palace guards. The uniforms do

 

 

not fit properly.

 

The human-like creatures are orcs (AC 6; HD
1; hp 4 each; MV 30’; #AT 1; D 1-6; Save F1;
ML 8; ALC). The orcs were led by Travis who
had them dress up in the uniforms of guards.

Ores are nocturnal, usually sleeping in the
day and active in the dark. When fighting in
full daylight, they must subtract 1 from their
“to hit” roll. The orcs’ treasure totals 12 gp,
38 sp, and 56 cp.

41, JAIL CELLS

 

This area is a group of jail cells. In the aisles
between the cells you see two large apes
with white fur.

 

 

 

The large apes are white apes (AC 6; HD 4; hp
18 each; MV 40’; #AT 2; D 1-4/1-4; Save F2;
ML 7; AL N). the white apes will beat their
chests and growl as the party enters the room.
If their threats are ignored, they will attack.

Three of the cells contain statues of men
dressed in everyday clothing. The rest of the
cells appear empty. Hidden behind a statue
inside one of the cells is a small wooden chest.
The chest holds 1,000 cp, 400 sp, and 200 gp.
This money is used to pay the guards. Travis
hid the chest in the cell.



A number of life-sized stone statues of
humans and dwarves have been piled in
this cave. No attempt has been made to
store the statues in any order. Some statues
lean against the walls, others have fallen
down, and some have been stacked on top
of other statues.

 

 

 

The statues piled in this cave are humans who
were turned to stone when the disaster struck.
The orcs, goblins, and hobgoblins have been
clearing out the rooms and carrying the statues
to this cave. If the party takes the time to search
the cave (5 turns) they will find a chest contain-
ing weapons, beneath a pile of statues. The chest
holds 4 swords, 2 maces, and a battle axe. One of
the swords is a sword + 1. It is indistinguishable
from the rest of the swords unless a detect magic
is cast on it. If the party decides to use the
swords, number the swords 1-4 and let the magic
sword be number 3. Make sure each character
who is using a sword (or any other weapon from
the chest) tells the DM which weapon he or she is
using. For example, sword #2 or mace #1. Any
character using sword #3 will discover it is magi-
cal the first time the sword is used in combat.

43. FUNGUS CAVE

 

This room is filled with a number of clay
pots of different sizes. Plants were once
planted in the pots but all the plants are
now dead. Withered stalks, dead leaves,
and brown dried flowers litter the floor.
Though all plant life in the clay pots is
dead, a vile-looking yellow fungus grows
on the west walls.

 

 

 

The yellow fungus is yellow mold (AC can
always be hit; HD 2; hp 9; MV 0’; #AT 1; D
1-6 + special; Save F2; ML no applicable; AL
N). Yellow mold can only be killed by fire. A
torch will cause 1-4 points of damage to it each
round. Yellow mold will eat through wood
and leather, but does not harm metal or stone.
It does not actually attack, but if it is touched,
the mold will squirt out a 10’ x 10’ cloud of
spores. Anyone caught within the cloud must
save vs. Death Ray or choke to death within 6
rounds.

44, CAVE OF THE LOCUSTS

 

This huge cave is filled with stalactites and
stalagmites that glow blue. The stalactites
and stalagmites in many places have grown
together to form a single column, growing

 

 

 


together so closely, that in some places,
they almost form a wall from floor to ceil-
ing. It looks difficult, but not impossible,
to move through the cave.

 

 

 

This cave is the home of 8 giant locusts (AC 4;
HD 2; hp 9 each; MV 60’; #AT 1; D special;
Save F2; ML 5; AL N). Giant locusts are 3’
long, giant gray grasshoppers that live under-
ground. They are herbivorous (plant-eaters)
and often eat fungus such as yellow mold or
shriekers. They cannot be harmed by most
poisons. Giant locusts are stone gray and may
not be noticed until they move or until the
party approaches within 20’. They are very
nervous and will flee most of the time rather
than fight. They flee by jumping up to 60’.
Unfortunately, when they panic their only
thought is to escape. There is a 50% chance
that they will try to flee by jumping right
through the party. If they try to jump through
the party, choose a character at random and
roll to see if that character has been hit. If so,
the character takes 1-4 points of damage from
being battered. The locust then flies away.

Giant locusts can also attack and bite for 1-2
points (but not when they are fleeing). When
frightened or attacked, giant locusts make a
loud shrieking noise to warn their fellows.
This shriek has a 20% chance per round of
attracting wandering monsters to investigate.

If cornered, a giant locust will spit a brown
gooey substance up to 10’ at its attackers. To
hit a character, the locust need only make an
attack against armor class 9, no matter what
type of armor the individual is wearing. A
character hit by giant locust spittle must save
vs. Poison or be unable to do anything for 1
turn due to the awful smell. After this time he
or she will be used to the smell, but any char-
acter approaching within 5’ of the victim must
also save or be violently ill. This effect will last
until the spittle is washed off.

The blue glow of the stalactites and stalag-
mites is caused by a type of moss. The moss is
harmless. It can be used as a weak light source,
casting light up to 10’. If the players search the
cave they will find a small silver statuette of a
dragon readying for flight. The statuette is in
a niche along the north wall. The statuette
looks the same as the one found in room 33
(for more details see room 33).

45. CAVE POOL

 

A large pool of pitch black water fills the
toom. You see the glint of gold coming from
the far side of the pool. A hot wind blows
through the cave. Moisture fills the air and

 

 

 

tiny beads of water form on clothing, skin,
and hair. The floor is damp and slick.

 

 

 

Once the characters have entered the cave they
will be able to see the crowned head of a large
statue of a man. The statue seems to be made
of bronze. The eyes of the statue are small
tubies (value 50 gp each). The glint of gold
comes from a crown on top of the statue’s
head. The crown appears to be made of gold.
The statue really is bronze, but the crown is
only gold paint.

The liquid in the pool is a kind of ink. The
water of the pool is heated by hot springs. The
hot water absorbs color from a particular kind of
mineral lining the pool. The result is a deep pur-
ple ink. Anything that comes in contact with the
ink will be stained purple. Since the ink is per-
manent it will have to wear off naturally (1-6
days). It will not stain non-porous surfaces which
do not absorb water very well (such as steel). The
ink will not harm characters.

Once the characters reach the statue they
will find that the rubies can be pried out easi-
ly. If the party carefully examines the statue,
there is a 50% chance they will discover that
the head of the statue can be unscrewed. Hid-
den inside the head, packed in a protective
oilskin bag, is a ring of protection + 1.

46, BLADE TRAP

At the corner of the corridor is a trap. When a
character walks over a pressure plate in the
floor the trap might be sprung. Roll 1d6. The
trap will be sprung on a roll of 1. Roll sepa-
rately for each character that walks around the
corner. If the trap is sprung, a weighted blade
(like a guillotine blade) will fall from the ceil-
ing causing 1-10 points of damage to the per-
son who sprung the trap. The blade is hidden
in the ceiling.

47. TROGLODYTE ROOM

 

In the center of the room you see three
human-like reptiles with short tails, long
legs, and a spiny “comb” on their heads
and arms. They block the way out.

 

 

 

The human-like reptiles are troglodytes (AC
5; HD 2*; hp 9 each; MV 40’; #AT 3; D 1-4
each; Save F2; ML 9; AL C). Troglodytes are
intelligent. They hate most other creatures
and will try to kill anyone they meet. Hence
they will attack on sight. Troglodytes have a
chameleon-like power to blend into their sur-
roundings (normally they surprise on 1-4 on
1d6), but they are not using the ability at the
moment. Troglodytes secrete an oil when
fighting which smells so bad that characters



THE SILVER PRINCESS

will be nauseated unless they save vs. Poison.
Nauseated characters have a penalty of —2 on
their “to hit” rolls while in melee combat
with the troglodytes.

48. WATCH ROOM

 

This room is higher than the surrounding
countryside so that guards could look out
on the surrounding land when standing
watch. There are windows in the west and
south walls. You notice that the red glow
still surrounds the palace. In the center of
the room is an iron ladder. The ladder
leads to a trap door in the ceiling. By the
south wall you see a statue that looks like a
cleric. He looks frightened and had appar-
ently just finished scratching a message
into the wall. The inscription reads:

Evil red eye, malefaction!

Sweet music from strings;
Priceless Blade of Destruction,
Salvation rides on dragon's wings!

 

 

 

The chief palace cleric had divined the evil
intent of Arik when disaster struck. He hur-
tiedly left the inscription — clues as to how to
destroy the ruby — in the faint hope that it
might help rescuers.

This trap door is the only way the party can
reach the second level of the dungeon. It is
important that the party reach the second
level and finish their mission, but it is also
important that they encounter a number of
monsters and traps before reaching the second
level. If they reached the second level too easi-
ly the adventure would not be a challenge. On
the other hand, since they must reach the sec-
ond level, the DM might consider sending the
vision of a Protector to the party if they cannot
find the way to this trap door leading to the
second level.

SECOND
DUNGEON LEVEL

Wandering Monsters

The second dungeon level has its own wander-
ing monster table. Check for wandering mon-
sters every other turn. Roll 1d6: the party will
encounter a wandering monster if a 1 is rolled.
The wandering monster will be first seen 20-
120 feet (2d6x10') away from the party when
encountered, in any direction and doing any-
thing the DM chooses. To determine exactly
which monster is encountered, use the Wan-
dering Monster Table: Level 2.


 

‘Wandering Monster Table: Level 2 (Roll 1d6)

 

Die Wandering

Roll__Monster NO AC HD #AT Damage Move Save ML AL
1 Ghoul 16 6 2 3 1-3 €a. 30° F209 C
2 Goblin 2-8 6 1-1 1 1-6 20' NM. 7G
3 Harpy ee te oO 1-4/1-4/1-6 20' SC
4 Hobgoblin ie On ri ut 1-8 30° RDB -G
5 Medusa L ent eee 1-6 + special 30’ BM rs CG
6 Zombie 2-8 8 2 1 1-8 40' Fl Iz iG

It is suggested that the monsters Harpy and
Medusa be encountered no more than once as
wandering monsters. If the DM rolls a wan-
dering monster encounter with a second Har-
py or Medusa, a wandering monster from the
Level One table should be chosen instead.
Both monsters are very difficult challenges,
might upset the play balance if encountered
too many times.

All the monsters on the second level wan-
dering monster table appear in the D&D®
Basic rules. Only those with unusual powers
are described below.

Ghoul: A successful attack by a ghoul will par-
alyze any creature of ogre-size or smaller,
except elves, unless the victim saves vs. Paraly-
sis. Elves are immune to the paralysis, but still
take normal damage from a ghoul’s attacks.
Paralysis lasts for 2-8 turns.

Harpy: Any character hearing the harpy’s song
must save vs. Spells or be charmed. Charmed
individuals will move toward the harpy, resist-
ing any attempt to stop them, but not other-
wise attacking. If a character successfully saves
the character will not be affected by the harpy
song for that encounter. Harpies are resistant
to magic and have a +2 on all their saves.
Medusa: Looking at a medusa will turn a char-
acter to stone unless the victim saves vs. Turn
to Stone. A medusa can also attack with her
snaky hair. The bites of the snakes are poison-
ous (save vs. Poison or die in one turn) and
when the snakes hit they cause 1-6 points of
damage. Anyone who tries to attack a medusa
without looking at it must subtract 4 from
their “to hit” roll. A medusa is resistant to
magic and gains +2 on saves vs. Spells only,
other saving throws are normal.

Key to Dungeon Level Two
49. WATCH TOWER

 

This watch tower has 6 windows overlook-
ing the surrounding lands. There is a trap
door in the center of the floor. A stone
statue of a guard stands looking out each
window. Except for the statues the room
looks empty.

 

 

 

The room is empty except for the statues,

50. PASSAGEWAY

 

As soon as you open the door, bright lights
flood the hallway. You see three swords
fighting each other, as if being held by
invisible men.

 

 

 

The fighting swords and bright light is an illu-
sion placed there by the palace magic-user to
frighten intruders who might enter the palace
through the tower. The illusion is triggered by
the door opening without the password
“Argenta” being spoken. If any character
touches the illusion it will be dispelled.

51. LABORATORY

 

You see a room filled with stuffed animals,
shelves filled with books and scrolls, and
jars of powders and herbs. Strange symbols
are painted on the walls. An iron statue of
a warrior stands in the southeast corner of
the room. A polishing cloth is draped over
the warrior's shield.

 

 

 

This room was the palace magic-user’s labora-
tory. The iron statue is actually a living iron
statue (AC 2; HD 4; hp 18; MV 10’; #AT 2;D
1-8/1-8; Save F4; ML 11; ALN). Living iron
statues have bodies which can absorb iron and
steel. When hit, they will take normal dam-
age, but if a non-magical metal weapon is
used, the attacker must save vs. Spells or the
weapon will become stuck in the body of the
living iron statue, and can only be removed if
the statue is killed.

52. STOREROOM

This small room appears to be empty.

The room once held stores of various sorts but
has recently been cleaned out.

 



53. MIRABILIS’ ROOM

 

A plain bed and a huge wooden desk dom-
inate this sparsely furnished bedchamber.
A broom lies in one corner near a pile of
dirt. A tattered pair of silk bedroom slip-
pets lie on the floor near the bed. A small
nightstand has been overturned. While
you watch, a small black kitten races out
from under the bed, bats one of the slip-
pers around, then runs back under the
bed.

 

 

 

The room is the bedroom of the palace magic-
user, Mirabilis. The black kitten is his familiar
and pet. Three times a day the kitten can
transform itself into a panther (AC 4; HD 4;
hp 18; MV 70’; #AT 3; D 1-4/1-4/1-8; Save
F2; ML 8; ALL). The transformation lasts 10
rounds. When in kitten form the creature is
harmless. Note that while panthers are usually
neutral in alignment, the kitten/panther is
lawful because this magical animal is the
familiar of a magic-user.

If the party carefully searches the desk,
there is a 50% chance that they will find a
secret compartment. The secret compartment
holds a potion of invisibility.

54. WASHROOM

 

A mirror is hung on the east wall. In front
of the mirror is a wash stand. On top of the
wash stand is a porcelain bowl filled with
water. A statue stands in front of the wash
stand. The statue is of an old man with
long hair and beard. The man wears robes
covered with magical symbols. The statue
looks like a man trimming his beard with a
pair of scissors.

 

 

 

The statue is actually Mirabilis, the palace
magic-user, who was turned into stone by the
Eye of Arik. Mirabilis was trimming his beard
at the time.

55. STUDY

 

A statue of a young girl playing with a dove
is in the southeastern corner of this oddly
shaped room. A large hand-carved book-
case stands next to the northeastern wall.
Two wooden benches, one in front of each
of the the two southwestern windows, have
scrolls lying upon them. Two women stand
next to one of the benches. Both women
wear leather armor and carry swords. One
of the women has just unrolled a scroll and
is reading it.

 

 

 

The statue in this room is one of Princess


 

Argenta’s ladies in waiting who was turned to
stone. None of the scrolls in the room are
magical, they are merely blank parchment on
which court officials sometimes write letters.

The two women appear to be fighters, but
are really thieves. They were trying to loot the
rooms of Mirabilis before the disaster struck.
Mirabilis caught them and put them to sleep
with a sleep spell. He was going to clean up
and then report them to the guards, but disas-
ter struck first. The women thieves were not
affected by the disaster. They have only
recently awakened and are setting out to loot
the palace. The two women are named Can-
della (AC 5;T/2; hp 8; MV 40’; #AT 1; D 1-8;
Save T2; ML 7; AL N; S12, 115, W13, D17,
C15, Ch 14), and Duchess (AC 5;T/2; hp 11;
MV 40’; #AT 1; D 1-8; Save T2; ML7; ALN;
$11, 112, W15, D16, C18, Ch15). Because of
their wisdom ability scores, both women gain
a bonus of +1 on magic-based saving throws.
The two thieves are both very attractive and
will attempt to use this to their benefit.

These two thieves will act friendly toward
the party. They will pretend to be young inex-
perienced fighters in search of adventure.
They will politely ask to join the party, saying
that they are not quite as tough or as prepared
for adventuring as they had originally
thought.

If they join the party the two thieves will wait
for a good chance to steal whatever they can
(either by trying to pick pockets or just grabbing
any loot in sight), and then run away.

If the thieves are not allowed to join the
party, but are not attacked, they will try to get
close enough to a character to try to pick that
person's pockets. If discovered, they will claim
that the person made a mistake, that they
merely bumped into the person by accident.
If successful they will leave with their loot.

The thieves will each have the following: a
backpack, 50’ rope, 12 iron spikes, mirror,
wineskin, rations, 4 small sacks, 21 cp, 7 sp,
15 gp, wolfsbane (Duchess only), and a string
of pearls worth 600 gp (Candella only).

When playing the roles of NPCs the DM
should keep in mind that NPCs are reasonably
normal persons. They seldom act suicidally,
usually fighting only if there is a chance to
win. While they will take risks, they will sel-
dom take unreasonable risks. In this particular
encounter, the two thieves want loot. They are
likely to try whatever method offers the best
possibilities for gaining the most loot at the
least risk.

56. MAGIC USER’S BEDROOM

 

In this room is a large canopy bed with
heavy dark red curtains, all closed. Three

 

 

 

matching rugs lie side by side on the floor.
The room also contains a long wooden
dresser, a matching chest of drawers, and a
large stuffed easy chair.

 

 

 

If the party opens the curtains to the bed they
will see an old man lying in the bed. The old
man has a long white beard and hair. He is
wearing robes embroidered with magical sym-
bols. If the party asks, let them know that the
man looks exactly like the statue in room 54.
Even the clothing is similar.

The creature on the bed is not really a man,
it isa doppleganger (AC 5; HD 4*; hp 18; MV
30’; #AT 1; D 1-12; Save F10; ML 10; AL C).
Dopplegangers are man-sized, shape-
changing creatures that are intelligent and
evil. A doppleganger is able to shape itself
into the exact form of any human-like crea-
ture (up to 7’ tall) it sees. The creature is imi-
tating the statue of Mirabilis. While the
doppleganger can speak, it cannot cast spells
(as Mirabilis could, if he were not stone). The
doppleganger will try to join the party. Then,
when it gets a chance and no one is watching,
it will single out a victim. Just before it
attacks, the doppleganger will turn into a
duplicate of the victim. The doppleganger
will try to secretly kill its victim so that it can
take the victim’s place.

If Duchess and Candella are with tl. > party,
the doppleganger may choose one of them asa
victim or one of the party members. Of
course, if the doppleganger succeeds in killing
its victim, and hides the corpse, it will pretend
to be the new character. Sooner or later some-
one should notice that Mirabilis has disap-
peared. The doppleganger will continue to
kill characters secretly until caught.

Sleep and charm spells do not affect dop-
plegangers. When killed, a doppleganger will
turn back to its original form, that of a
human-like creature with blank features.

57. ALCOVE

 

This small alcove contains two large cush-
ioned chairs. A small book lies on the floor
between them.

 

 

 

The small book is a book of prayers. Someone
has slashed the pages with a knife. The prayer
book was slashed apart by the bugbears in room
59.

58. SANCTUARY

 

This large room looks like a temple where
the patron Immortal of Haven is wor-
shipped. A statue wearing clerical robes

 

 

 



stands in front of an altar. More statues of
people of many different ages, all dressed
in normal clothing, sit on the wooden
pews. Someone has splashed red paint over
the altar and all the statues.

 

 

 

This room is the palace chapel. A service was
being held at the time when the disaster
struck. The cleric Branaur and the people
attending the service were all turned into
stone. The bugbears in room 59 have splashed
red paint on the statues. If they check, the
party will discover that the paint is still fresh.

59. CHAPEL

 

This room is filled with symbols holy to the
gods of Haven. Three large, human-like
individuals are splashing red paint on the
holy symbols using large buckets of paint.
The three creatures are extremely hairy and
ugly-looking.

 

 

 

If the party has encountered goblins or hob-
goblins, they will recognize a family resem-
blance between goblins, hobgoblins and the
three bugbears (AC 5; HD 3 +1; hp 14 each;
MV 30’; #AT 1; D 1-6 +1; Save F3; ML 9; AL
C). Bugbears are giant hairy goblins. Because
of their strength, they add +1 to all damage
rolls with weapons (but not on their “to hit”
rolls).

60, SECRET CLOSET

 

You see a number of clerical robes and
fighting gear hanging in this closet.

 

 

 

Branaur keeps his spare robes and fighting
equipment in this secret closet. His armor is
plate mail +1 and his mace is a mace +1.

61. GAME ROOM

 

A game table has been set up in the middle
of the room. A chess set sits upon it, with a
game apparently in progress. Two statues
sit on either side of the chess board. One
statue is of a man, the other is of a woman.
On the north wall of the room is a mosaic
map of Haven. The area on the map which
fepresents the palace glows with a red
light. The red light seems to be slowly
expanding outward, covering more of
Haven as you watch.

 

 

 

The wall map magically depicts the spreading
influence of the Eye of Arik. It indicates that if
the player characters do not succeed in their
mission, Haven is doomed.


62, BALLROOM

 

This large ballroom is decorated in silver,
red and blue. The two huge fireplaces are
stacked with logs. A bell-shaped wire
framework hangs from the ceiling, sup-
ported by four white marble columns. The
framework is decorated with intertwined
leaves and flowers. You hear the strains of
eerie music. Two pale, shadowy appari-
tions are dancing to the sounds of the
strange music. The two figures are dressed
in clothing that was popular more than
three hundred years ago.

 

 

 

The ballroom had already been decorated for
the grand dance to celebrate the finding of the
ruby when the disaster struck Haven. The two
ghostly dancers have haunted the ballroom
since their tragic deaths nearly 300 years ago.
The ghostly dancers were lovers who died on
the eve of their marriage just before a grand
ball to celebrate their marriage. Ever since
then, they have haunted the ballroom at
times right before a grand ball. They leave
when the dance begins, but since the celebra-
tion has been postponed indefinitely, they
continue to haunt the room.

Characters who look at the ghostly dancers
must make a saving throw vs. Spells or run
from the room in fright. Anyone who fails to
save will run into room 63 (the garden). the
ghostly dancers have no actual physical
bodies. They cannot attack, nor can they be
hurt by weapons or magic. If attacked, they
will continue to dance on, completely ignor-

ing the party.
63. PALACE GARDEN

 

This area is the palace garden. The garden
is roofless and is lit from above by a blood
ted light. The garden has become com-
pletely overgrown with weeds. Except fora
large stand of white rose bushes in the cen-
ter of the garden, all the flowers that once
grew here have died. One type of weed
seems most common in the garden. The
weed is a large bush. It has a dwarf-sized
central trunk covered with sickly-looking
green leaves. Growing out of the central
mound-like trunk is a tangle of many
thorny branches. You see about a dozen of
these plants. Beneath the weeds you can
just barely see a cobblestone path that
wanders through the garden.

 

 

 

Where Arik rules, normal plants do not grow.
The normal flowers in the garden have all
died. In their place now grow weeds and two
monstrous types of plants.

The garden introduces two new monsters:
archer bushes and vampire roses. The bushes
with the sickly green trunks and thorny brown
branches are archer bushes (AC 7; HD 2; hp 9
each; MV 1’; #AT 1; D 1-4; Save Fl; ML 12;
AL C). Archer bushes are carnivorous and can
move slowly to reach dead prey. Hidden in the
trunk, beneath the leaves, is a large mouth.
The mouth holds extra hard thorns which the
archer bush uses like teeth to devour prey once
the prey is killed. Archer bushes attack by
shooting a spray of thorns at their victims. The
thorn spray is composed of several small
thorns which become embedded in the vic-
tim’s flesh on a successful “to hit’’ roll. The
thorn spray causes 1-4 points of damage, and
can only be directed at one target at a time.
Archer bushes can shoot their thorn spray up
to 20 feet away. Each bush can only fire three
such sprays in a day.

The white rose bush at the center of the gar-
den is a vampire rose bush. Vampire roses (AC
7; HD 4; hp 18; MV 10’; #AT 1+ blood
drain; D 1-8; Save F2; ML 12; AL C) look like
normal white rose bushes. Like the archer
bushes, however, they can uproot themselves
to move about slowly. Each 4 hit dice worth of
vampire roses represents a single rose bush.
There is only one vampire rose bush in this
garden. The 10’ long thorny stalks of a vam-
pire rose can whip around a victim, inflicting
1-8 points of damage on a successful hit. Once
the thorn stalk has struck and wrapped around
a victim, the vampire rose will inflict 1-8
points of damage (blood-drain) each round
automatically. The vampire rose also injects a
hypnotic anesthetic into the victim's blood-
stream. The victim must save vs. Spells or lose
all willpower, allowing the vampire rose to
continue sucking blood until the victim dies.
If the victim saves successfully, any character
with normal strength can break free and try to
run away. After a vampire rose has completely
drained a victim, the roses will be colored
blood red instead of white for 1 day.

The archer bushes and the vampire bush
work together. The vampire rose needs a vic-
tim’s blood and the archer bushes need the
victim's flesh. On a pedestal 5’ away from the
vampire rose bush is a silver statuette of a
dragon about to fly. The statuette is similar to
the ones in rooms (33 & 43). The silver statu-
ettes can be used to return the dragon Ariks-
bane to Haven. Ariksbane can destroy the Eye
of Arik (see room 30 for details).

64. SILENT ALARM

Corridor: As the party steps under this arch-
way, they will step on a hidden pressure plate
that rings an alarm bell in room 65, warning
the monster there of the party’s presence.



65. GREAT HALL

 

This large dining hall is panelled with
rough wood. Wooden bracing beams run
from floor to ceiling along all four walls.
Crossbeams run from the bracing beams,
supporting the wooden ceiling. A large
fireplace is set in the north wall. A long U-
shaped wooden table dominates the center
of the room. Stuffed animal heads, obvi-
ously hunting trophies, hang on the walls.

 

 

 

This dining room was used for grand feasts.
The wooden beams were intended to give it a
“rugged” look. Hanging from the ceiling
beams, waiting for the party, isa new monster,
a decapus (which was warned of the party's
approach when they stepped on the pressure
plate in area 64).

The decapus (AC 5; HD 4; hp 18; MV 1’ or
30'; #AT 9; D 1-6 or 1-3 each; Save F2; ML 9;
AL C) is a creature usually found in forests. It
looks like a bloated, hairy globe with ten ten-
tacles. Its hair is brown, and its body is green.
In the center of the decapus's 4’ wide body is a
huge, toothy mouth.

Decapuses usually live alone, preferring to
hunt by themselves. They hunt by swinging
through trees and scooping up their prey in
their tentacles. The tentacles are 10’ long.
They extend from all parts of its body. The
tentacles are covered with suckers which the
decapus can use not only to grasp prey, but to
climb walls and ceilings.

The decapus attacks with nine of its tenta-
cles, using the tenth tentacle to hang from the
ceiling (or trees). When the floor or ground,
the decapus is much more helpless. Its tenta-
cles are not strong enough to support its
weight upright for long periods of time. On
the ground, the decapus can only manage six
attacks, and these attacks do only half normal
damage. When swinging through trees, the
decapus can travel at 90' per turn, or 30’ per
round. On the ground the decapus can only
move 3’ per turn or 1’ per round.

If the party searches the room they will find
on the mantle a book, which the orcs who
serve Arik took from the library and brought
to the decapus to guard. The book details
what happens when Arik tries to break into
another dimension. The party will recognize
the description as similar to what has befallen
Haven. The book also details methods of
destroying an Eye of Arik, including those
methods given in the introduction. If the par-
ty is not already aware what their true mission
is and how the mission can be accomplished,
the DM should take this opportunity to
inform them.


 

66. WASHROOM

 

This room contains a counter along the
east wall. Beneath the counter top is a pair
of sliding cabinet doors. The room other-
wise appears to be empty.

 

 

 

This is a room where hunters clean up after the
hunt. Beneath the counter are shelves filled
with basins for holding water, bars of soap,
and clean towels, The room is empty of mon-
stefs or treasure.

67. LOUNGE

 

This room holds piles of broken furniture.
Standing among the remains of the furni-
ture is a huge fearsome, human-like crea-
ture about 9’ tall. The creature is wearing
skins for clothing.

 

 

 

The human-like creature is an ogre (AC 5; HD
4+1; hp 19; MV 30’; #AT 1; D 1-10; Save F4;
ML 10; AL C). The ogre is on a rampage and
has just destroyed the furniture here for the
fun of it. The ogre is carrying a leather sack
with 300 gp in it.

68. SUMMONING ROOM

 

When you open the door you see a man
chanting in some unknown language. The
man is standing inside a blood fed circle.
Strange symbols have been painted around
the circle. The man has long black hair and
wears red robes. Hanging from his belt is a
mace. A red eye has been painted in the
center of his forehead. Inside the circle, in
front of the man, is a strange-looking
sword. The sword, which appears to be
made of ruby, rests on a plush black velvet
cushion. As the man continues to chant,
the sword begins to pulse with a crimson
light.

 

 

 

The man inside the circle is Catharandamus, a
cleric who worships Arik (AC 2; C3; hp 15;
MV 30’; #AT 1; D 1-6 +2 or by spell; ML 7;
AL C; $16, 112, W17, D12, C10, Ch14).
Right now, he is in the middle of a ceremony
that will permit Arik to teleport from his
prison dimension to Haven. The focal point of
the ceremony is the ruby sword, which is the
Sword of Arik. This sword will act as a gate
through which Arik will enter Haven if the
ceremony is successful. As soon as Catharan-
damus sees the party he will yell “Help!” A
voice from behind the left inner door (to room
69) will answer ‘“‘Hang on, we're coming.”
Two rounds later the 7 orcs and the werewolf
from room 69 will burst into the room.

Catharandamus has two spells: darkness
and cause fear. Darkness is the reverse of the
spell light. It will block all sight except infra-
vision within a circle of darkness 30' in diame-
ter. It will cancel a light spell if cast against it
and vice versa. If cast at an opponent's eyes, it
will cause blindness until cancelled, or until
the spell duration is reached (12 turns). Cause
fear is the reverse of the spell remove fear. It
will make any one creature flee for 2 turns
unless a successful save vs. Spells is made. The
spell has a range of 120’.

Beneath his robes, Catharandamus wears a
suit of plate mail armor. He carries and will
fight with his magical mace +2.

69. BEDROOM

The wooden chest is a treasure chest. It is
trapped with a poison dart trap. A close
inspection of the chest will show that the lock
is in the form of a screaming face. The two
eyes of the face can be pushed in. If both eyes
are pushed in at the same time, the chest will
be safe to open. If not, a poison needle will
shoot out of the mouth when opened. Any-
one opening the chest without precautions
will be hit by the needle and must save vs. Poi-
son or die within 2 rounds. Inside the chest are
650 gp, 1,000 sp, and a pouch holding 10 fire
agates (a type of gem stone) each worth 50 gp.
The treasure belongs to Catharandamus and
his bodyguard.

71. SITTING ROOM

 

This room contains a bed, a large wooden
chest, a stool, and a wooden wardrobe.

 

 

 

The bedclothes are crumpled, as if a number
of people had been sitting on the bed. The
chest is filled with old nightshirts packed in
mothballs. The wardrobe is empty. Normally
this room is a guest bedroom. Recently, the
room has been occupied by the bodyguard of
Catharandamus, the cleric in room 68. The
bodyguard is 7 large orcs (AC 6; HD 1; hp 6
each; MV 40’; #AT 1; D 1-6; Save Fl; ML 8;
ALC). The orcs all carry shields with a red eye
painted on them. The leader of the orcs is
Alha, a werewolf (lycanthrope), When first
encountered, she will be in human form, but
she will change into a werewolf to attack if she
can. Alha (AC 5 (9 in human form); HD 4*;
hp 18; MV 60’; #AT 1; D 2-8; Save F4; ML 8;
AL C) will also be wearing a red robe and has
an eye painted on her forehead.

If Catharandamus yells for help (from room
68), Alha and the orcs will yell back that they
are on their way and rush to his aid. Alha will
turn into a werewolf and attack. Any human
character who is severely hurt by her (losing
more than half of his or her hit points) will
become a lycanthrope of the same type in 2-24
days. The victim will begin to show signs of
the disease (such as an appetite for raw meat)
after only half that time. The disease will kill
non-humans instead of turning them into
were-creatures. However, if the Eye of Arik is
destroyed as a result of the party’s actions, any
character with the disease of lycanthropy will
automatically be cured.

70. TREASURE ROOM

 

This room appears to be bare except for a
table and four chairs. A wooden chest sits

 

 

on top of the table.

 



Several chairs and tables form a semi-circle
in front of the fireplace in this room. A
worn rug lies rolled up in one corner. A
knitting basket sits next to the rug. On a
small table near the fireplace is a small tea
cup on a saucer and a tea pot. Hanging
over the fireplace is a portrait of Princess
Argenta. She is holding a beautiful blood
red ruby the size of an apple.

 

 

 

The tea cup is magical. If any character touch-
es the tea cup it will speak, reciting a tiddle-
type poem which gives the party hints on how
to stop the disaster that has befallen Haven.
The riddle is:

Three crystal notes;

Two Silver drakes;

One ruby sword;

All will smash the Demon's Eye,
And lift the curse from Haven.

The riddle refers to the Ice Harp (room 32),
the silver statuettes of the dragon Ariksbane
(rooms 33, 43, and 63), and the Sword of Arik
(room 68).

72. BATHING ROOM

 

The walls of this bathing room are painted
with peaceful scenes of spring and sum-
mer. An ornate marble and silver bathtub
sits against the eastern wall. A silver enam-
elled towel rack standing next to the tub
holds a towel and wash cloth. A soap con-
tainer of carved ivory sits on a stand next to
the tub. At the head of the tub is a deli-
cately sculpted tray. Sitting on the tray are
three small gems. One gem is red, one is
blue, the other is yellow.

 

 

 

This particular bath tub is magical. If the red
stone is placed in the tub, the tub will fill with


hot water. If the yellow stone is placed in the
tub, the tub will fill with cold water. If both
stones are placed in the tub at the same time, the
tub will fill with warm water. If the blue stone is
placed in a tub full of water, the water will disap-
pear. These gems are only worth 100 gp each,
and they will only work in this bath tub.

73. ARGENTA’S BEDROOM

 

A large ornate canopy bed sits in the mid-
dle of the room. The bed posts have been
carved to resemble twining vines. The bed
is covered with dull red velvet. Tapestries
line three walls. They show typical scenes
of life in Haven before the disaster struck.
To cither side of the double door is a hand-
carved wooden chest of drawers. Both chest
of drawers have mirrors on top of them. A
small cushioned chair and matching foot-
stool are at the end of the bed.

 

 

 

This was Princess Argenta’s room. It is cur-
rently empty.

74, GUARD ROOM

 

The room contains a wooden table and sev-
eral wooden chairs. Standing next to the
fireplace is a man dressed in the uniform of
the palace guard. The man’s body has
more than a dozen stab wounds, which
would normally kill an individual.

 

 

 

The man in the guard uniform is a corpse. Liv-
ing in the corpse is a particular kind of undead
spirit known as a wight (AC 5; HD 3*; hp 13;
MV 30’; #AT 1; D Energy drain; Save F3; AL
12; AL C). Wights can only be hit by silvered
or magical weapons, or turned by a cleric. On
a successful hit from a wight, it will drain life
energy. Each hit drains one level of experience
or hit die and any abilities gained for that level
are lost. For example, a 3rd level fighter struck
by a wight becomes a 2nd level fighter, keep-
ing only enough experience points to be at the

midpoint of 2nd level, and losing one hit die
of hit points. Any person totally drained of
life energy by a wight will become a wight in
1-4 days, and will be under the control of the
wight who drained him or her.

Hidden behind a loose stone in the north
wall is the wight’s treasure: 2,000 gp and a
crystal ball.

75. ALE ROOM

 

On a stand in the southeast corner of the
room sits a cask that has been tapped with
a spout. A cabinet next to the cask holds
dozens of glasses. The room also contains a
half-dozen wooden chairs.

 

 

 

This room is an ale room. It is empty of mon-
stefs of treasure at present.

76. THRONE ROOM

 

An ornate throne of silver and oak sits atop
a dais along the center of the north wall.
On either side of the dais is a tapestry
showing the changing seasons in Haven.
Spring and Summer are shown on the tap-
estry to the left of the throne. Fall and
Winter are shown on the tapestry to the
right of the throne. The room is filled with
statues of men, women and dwarves. The
statues are arranged to resemble a typical
court scene (one statue kneels in front of
the throne, statues of guards flank the
throne, a statue of a councilor is leaning
over, as if whispering to a person on the
throne, etc.) Resting in the middle of the
throne is a glowing ruby the size of a large
man’s fist.

 

 

 

This is Princess Argenta’s court room, the
heart of the palace. The statues are people
who were turned to stone when the Eye of
Arik took control. If the party looks closely at
the ruby, they will notice what appears to be
two people trapped inside. One is Princess

Argenta, the other is Ellis the Strong, Knight
of the White Drakes.

As soon as the first character touches the
ruby, red vapors will billow up from it and sur-
round the dais, momentarily obscuring
vision, When the smoke clears, several fight-
ets in glowing red plate mail with red swords
and shields will be standing there guarding
the dais. The number of guards will always be
exactly equal to the number of party members
present when the encounter begins.

The glowing guards are illusions, similar to
the fighter in room 15. However, they will not
go away for 10 rounds or when they are actu-
ally touched by a hand (not hit in combat).
They attack as 3 hit dice monsters (inflicting
1-10 points per hit), and no attacks from the
party will hit or harm them. As soon as one
illusion is touched with a hand, they will all
disappear and the “dead” and “wounded”
characters will realize that the damage they
took in this battle was imaginary.

This is the key room in the party’s quest. Their
mission is to smash the ruby, thus freeing Haven
from the disaster that has overtaken the valley.
The ruby can only be destroyed in three ways: (1)
Three parti notes played on the Ice Harp
will shatter the ruby; (2) If the party brings two
(or more) statuettes of the silver dragon into the
room, the Ariksbane will be freed and
the dragon’s breath will disintegrate the ruby
(without harming anything else in the room);
(3) If some character touches the ruby Sword of
Arik to the ruby Eye of Arik, both will crumble
into worthless powder.

As soon as the ruby Eye of Arik is destroyed,
the disaster that has befallen Haven will not
only end, it will begin to reverse. Sick cattle
will recover, withered crops will grow green
again. The orcs, goblins, hobgoblins and oth-
er evil creatures that invaded Haven at the call
of the ruby will flee. The forces besieging the
Protector will be scattered. Those people turn-
ed to stone will become flesh. Only those indi-
viduals unfortunate enough to die as a result
of the disaster will not be restored to life. Oth-
erwise, Haven will return to normal.


THE HOBGOBLIN KING

 

 

The characters can stay in Haven until they are
completely rested. The Princess Argenta and
Ellis will be wed, and the characters will be
honored guests. At the conclusion of the cele-
bration, Thendara appears. Everyone is suit-
ably impressed—there were a growing
number of people in Haven who were begin-
ning to doubt her existence. The princess will
ask Thendara if the characters can stay. The
Immortal will smile, shake her head no, and
say that the characters have more adventures
ahead of them.

When the characters are ready, Thendara will
transport them to the bank of a river, With a
wave of her hand, she creates a boat
enough to hold all of them, and fully provi-
sioned for a journey of some days. Thendara tells
them that the way back to civilization lies down-
stream. She also gives them a sealed scroll, and
instructs them to open it only when Karameikos
has become too small for them.

The scroll is the title to a ship that will be
waiting for them in Specularum (to be used
for adventure X1, the Isle of Dread). If the
scroll should be lost, stolen or destroyed
before it is used, it will reappear within 24
hours. If it is given away or sold, it will disap-
pear forever.

Since the characters don’t know where they
are, sailing downstream is their only option.
Shortly after they set out, it begins to rain.
The rain continues for several days, and the
nights are cold and wild. Worse, the food
stafts to spoil. Just as everyone is starting to
feel pretty miserable, a small settlement and
fort comes into view on the east side of the riv-
er. On the west bank is a towering, fog-
shrouded hill of rock that rises over 400 feet
into the air.

If the party tries to land at the settlement,
they will run aground and damage their boat.
It will require at least a week to repair. In the
meantime, they can go to the Lion’s Den Inn,
the only inn in town. There, they will begin
the adventure of the Hobgoblin King.

If the party decides to continue on their way
to Specularum, the food will go bad (and
must be purified daily), the weather will stay
bad, and all must make a successful Constitu-
tion check or become ill (lose half of total hit
points, —1 on all rolls for a week). The hit
points must be recovered by bed rest, which
will be possible once the characters reach the
Barony of Kelvin. While they are recuperat-
ing, word comes that a small settlement some
distance upriver named Guido's Fort has been
overrun by hobgoblins and destroyed. (It will
be a campaign year before the site is reset-
tled.) The rest of the journey to Specularum is
uneventful.

 

ete eee eeteeated
ee er

a smreyi)

Design: Douglas Niles
Editing: Laurie Mann
Graphic Design: Ruth Hoyer
Cover Art: Jim Roslof
Interior Art: Jim Holloway

General Notes: This adventure was originally
published as BS, Horror on the Hill. Its action
is fairly continuous once the players descend
past the first level, which can be dangerous for
very low level characters. The adventure in the
Hill itself is presented here; nineteen minor
encounter areas on the slopes of the Hill have
been excluded.

PASTS) ces, Shera ere ntare ays, ciovetats Stet wtetstateha 142-145



Beginning the Adventure

Characters begin their adventure at Guido's
Fort, at the Lion’s Den Inn. The inn has a
large common room filled with many benches
and tables, a bar, and a large fireplace. The
common room is a smoky, dimly-lit place, and
tends to be rather quiet. The inn also has
sleeping quarters for rent. One sp per person
buys a night’s lodging on a straw pallet in the
back room. The quarters are so dirty that char-
acters who sleep here have a 75% chance of
becoming flea-infested during the night!
(Fleas won't affect a character's play; they're
just a temporary nuisance.)

At any given time of day or night, 2-12
(2d6) persons can be found in the Lion’s Den.
Player characters can learn two of the rumors
on the table below from any of these patrons
or the innkeeper. For your own information
only, the table shows whether the rumors are
true or false. To see which two rumors the
characters learn, roll 2d8, repeating if neces-
sary until the second roll is different from the
first. Note that the players must state that
they can begin to hear the rumors.

If the characters express an interest in learn-
ing more about The Hill, they are referred to
the “Old Timer.” For each cold beer the party
buys him, he will divulge another rumor,
until they have heard all eight. Note that the
Old Timer goes through the rumors randomly
(roll a 1d8), and although he will not repeat a
single rumor twice, he will probably repeat
the two rumors that the party has heard else-
where.

TABLE 1
RUMORS AT GUIDO’S FORT

Die True or
Roll Rumor False

1 Many centuries ago, an

old monastery was located

on top of The Hill. True
2 A fire-breathing dragon

lives in the caves below

The Hill. True
3 A band of slave-trading

ogtes is using The Hill as a

base for forays into the

civilized lands. False
4 Man-eating ghouls prowl

The Hill for food. True
5 There is a haunted grave-

yard on The Hill. True

6 — Anevil witch lives on The
Hill. Her house appears to


 

bea small hut, but in real-
ity is an extravagant pal-
ace where she keeps the
tortured souls of all who
have trespassed on the
slopes.

7 A huge orc army is
entrenched on The Hill,
waiting for orders to begin
a massive assault on
Guido’s Fort.

8 A bubbling lake of lava
lies below The Hill. The
lake is the source of the
steam columns that often
rise into the air from many
vents on the slopes’ sum-
mit. False

False

False

Purchasing Equipment

‘The trading post in Guido's Fort is well-stocked,
and the characters may want to purchase some
supplies there before embarking. Because the
outpost is isolated, however, prices are a little
higher than usual; and there is no guarantee the
players can find what they need.

To determine the availability of any item on
the Equipment List in the Basic rule book, roll
1d4. Any result other than a one means that a
character can find the item. Then roll a 1d6 if
a character wishes to purchase that item. A
result of one or two means that the price is the
same as that listed in the Basic rule book; a
three or four means that the price is 150% of
the listed amount; and a five or six means that
it costs twice as much. Note you follow this
procedure for each item purchased: even
though one player found a shortsword, for
example, there is no assurance the next player
can find one also.

Getting to the Hill and Back

Characters can cross the River Shrill to begin
their adventure on The Hill by seeking out
one of the fishermen in Guido’s Fort. Since
times are hard for the fishermen, any of them
are willing to ferry the party across the river.
Since The Hill is so dangerous, though, the
cost of the ferry is high: 20 gp.

The party might also try to rent a boat from
a fisherman, but without success. A fisherman
might agree to sell the party a boat, but no
fishermen is willing to rent one. Everyone in
Guido’s Fort is convinced the party is
doomed—and renting a boat to people you'll
never see again doesn’t make any sense! If the
party decides to buy a boat, the cost is 50-80
gp (1d4+4 x10).

As long as the party is adventuring on the
surface of The Hill, the party may return to
Guido’s Fort as often as they want or can. If
they haven't bought their own boat, though,
they must make arrangements for returning to
Guido’s Fort before they leave. Even if they
choose to stay on and under The Hill through-
out the adventure, they need return passage
when the adventure is ended. So in any case,
without their own boat, the party must plan
ahead for at least one return passage.

Perhaps they want to arrange for a fisher-
man to pick them up at a specified time and
place. Any of the fisherman are willing to do
so—for another 20 gp—but the party must be
on time or the fisherman leaves.

The party might also arrange for a fisher-
man to pick them up when he sees a smoke
signal the party sends. Once the party builds
its smoke signal fire, there is only a 20%
chance per turn someone in Guido’s Fort sees
the signal. The fisherman begins crossing the
river 1-4 (1d4) turns after someone notices the
smoke signal.

If the party has talked to the Old Timer at
the inn, they find him waiting for them at the
waterfront as they are getting ready to leave.
Impressed by the party’s courage and determi-
nation, he offers them a bottle of clear liquid
as a parting gift. He tells them a drink of the
liquid helps to heal wounds, and he cautions
them to use it sparingly. The bottle contains
three doses of potion of healing.

About Monsters

Many goblins and hobgoblins are on and
under The Hill, organized into a loose army
under the leadership of a hobgoblin king.
This king lives in the dungeon under The Hill
but is not extremely powerful or effective. His
troops are numerous but cowardly; and if
combat with goblins or hobgoblins goes badly
for the monsters, they try to escape. If the par-
ty prevents such an escape, the monsters sur-
render to save their own lives.

Note that if the characters return to town
between sorties on The Hill, certain monsters
are not idle in their absence. In particular,
ogres, hobgoblins, and goblins replenish their
garrisons three days after the party cleans
them out. In fact, there is a 33% chance the
number of ogres, hobgoblins, or goblins is
actually 50% larger than the number first
encountered! Wandering monsters do not
replenish themselves, however.

Important!

Encounters with wandering monsters are



designed to keep the PCs on their toes. They
are not designed to be the ultimate challenge
or climax of the adventure. If the dice call for
an encounter that you feel would seriously
deplete the party strength, you should ignore
that encounter.

The Mage

At the end of the adventure the characters will
encounter a red dragon that they might subdue.
Because of this, and because the latter parts of
the adventure are dangerous, you might set up
an encounter with a wandering mage who offers
aid (or, alternately, the following items: potion
of invisibility, two potions of healing, and a scroll
with the spells web, detect magic, and magic
missile) in exchange for first choice of the booty.
If attacked, he disappears in a puff of smoke.
The mage should not aid them more than once.

TABLE 3

WANDERING MONSTERS IN
THE RUINED MONASTERY

Die Roll Creature Encountered

1 Rock Baboons (1-4): AC6; HD 2; hp
10, 9,7,7; MV 120’ (40’); #AT 1
club/1 bite; D 1-6/1-3; Save F2; ML
8; ALN.

2 Ogre (1): AC 5; HD 4+1; hp 5
each; MV 90' (30'); #AT 1; D 1-10;
Save F4; ML 10; ALC.

3 Hobgoblins (1-6): AC 6; HD 1+1;
hp 5 each; MV 90’ (30'); #AT 1; D
1-6; Save Fl; ML 8; AL C; each car-
ries spear and shortsword.

4 Dire Wolf (1): AC 6; HD 4+1; hp
20; MV 150’ (50'); #AT 1; D 2-8;
Save F2; ML 8; ALN.

5 Zombies (1-6): AC 8; HD 2; hp
12,10,9,8, 7,7; MV 120’ (40’); #AT
1; D 1-8; Save Fl; ML 12; ALC.

6 Giant Centipedes (1-8): AC 9; HD
1/2; hp 4, 4, 3, 3, 2, 2, 1; MV 60’
(20'); #AT 1; D poison; Save NM;
ML 7; ALN.

Key to Areas in the Ruined
Monastery

20. GARRISON QUARTERS

In ages past, this building quartered a small
garrison of fighters who protected the monks
of the monastery. The building has withstood
the ravages of time fairly well, though its
insides have been looted repeatedly. In the
large room, which was the dining room for the

overturned, and shattered pottery lies over
much of the floor. The small room off the din-
ing room was a kitchen; a few cracked pots and
an oven are all that remain.

Each of the four small rooms off the hallway
on the eastern wing of the garrison quarters
has a pair of well-rotted wooden beds, and
other pieces of rot that might have been tables
and chairs in some forgotten age.

21. HUGE POOL

 

This large, dark green expanse of water is
rimmed by moldy, well-worn stone, which

 

reveals still the pool’s artificial origin.

 

 

The water is uncomfortably warm to the
touch. The pool is fed by the same geothermal
forces that yield the blasts of steam in and
around The Hill. The water's depth varies
from about two feet around the rim to six feet
in the middle.

Along the east end of the pool is a crumbled
mass of stone that was at one time a luxurious
bathhouse. No ceiling stands over these four
rooms, and the walls have crumbled to only
three or four feet of height. Large cracks can
be seen, and many of the stone slabs that had
been used as the ceiling are supported by
debris. Lurking in these cracks and crevices are
eight giant centipedes, which rush forward to
attack any creatures passing the east rim of the

pool.
Giant Centipedes (8): AC 9; HD 1/2; hp 4,4,

3,3,2,2,1,1; MV 60’ (20’); #AT 1; D poi-
son; Save NM; ML 7; ALN.

22. STEAM VENT

 

This wide crevasse is apparently bottom-
less. Greenish mold and fungi grow thickly
along the lip of the opening.

 

 

 

As is true of the other vents of The Hill, there
isa 5% chance per turn that the vent erupts in
a column of steam. As usual, one round
before it erupts, any character standing on the
rim of the vent can hear a gurgling sound. The
sound gets louder throughout the round and
culminates in a column of boiling steam
shooting into the sky. Any character standing
on the rim when the geyser erupts takes 1-6
(1d6) points of damage for each round he is
engulfed in steam. The blast lasts 2-12 (2d6)
rounds.

23. OLD TOMB

 

The double doors of this building are elab-
orately carved with a leering face and gro-
tesque torso. The creature's mouth is
gaping open to display row upon row of
hideously pointed fangs. Two long, claw-
tipped arms are carved in relief: they seem
almost to be reaching out to gather in any-
one standing before the doors.

 

 

 

This carving depicts an old pagan deity, a fat,
squatting, vaguely humanoid figure whose
face is twisted into a hideous leer. The door it
guards are locked. Once inside, the group sees
a large room lined with many doors. Occupy-
ing a position opposite the door is a large
granite statue of the same creature pictured on
the doors. This statue is carved in much more
detail, and two gems still glitter from its
eyesockets. The statue is about 12 feet tall,
but its protruding belly prevents any character
wearing metal armor from climbing up the
statue and removing the gems, each worth
100 gp.

As soon as any character touches the statue
or opens one of the doors on the perimeter of
the room, 12 guardians of the tomb burst
from the doors and attack. The guardians are
12 skeletons, and one comes from each door.

Skeletons (12): AC 7; HD 1; hp
8,7,6,6,5,5,4,4,3,3,2,1; MV 60’ (20');
#AT 1; D 1-6; Save Fl; ML 12; ALC.

Each of the skeletons is armed with a

shortsword and carries a shield.

The doors from which the skeletons emerge
lead to 12 individual tombs, each a broad slab
of stone set in the middle of an otherwise bar-
ren room. Behind the slab in room 23C is a
dagger +2, visible only if a character enters
the room and circles the slab.

24. TANGLED GARDEN

 

This garden is a tangled and thorny mass of
brambles—virtually impenetrable by
humans. Many types of plants have over-
run each other here.

 

 

 

This garden once grew the many potent ingre-
dients the monks used for brewing foul
potions, or for ingesting as part of ghastly rit-
uals. Since the monastery has been aban-
doned, the garden has grown wild.

The three spots marked with Xs on the map
are entrances to tunnels that goblins have
carved into the tangle. The tunnel entrances



THE HOBGOBLIN KING

have been carefully masked with bushes, but
they may be detected by rolling for a secret
door. Behind each pile of brush lurk three
goblins, waiting to ambush the party as they
approach the temple door to room #31. The
ambush is sprung only if the party is obviously
moving toward the door, or if they begin to
inspect the garden too closely.

Goblins (9): AC 6; HD 1-1; hp
7,6,6,5,4,4,3,2,1; MV 60’ (20'); #AT 1; D
1-6; Save NM; ML 7; ALC.

The goblins are armed with shortswords and

shields. The seven hit point goblin carries a

shield +1 (ACS).

25. INITIATES’ BARRACKS

This long room contains the rotted remains of
many wooden bunks. The room once housed
60 of the monks striving to become worthy of
the monastic order.

26. DINING HALL

 

This room holds rows of long tables and
benches, covered by a sickening greenish-
yellow mold.

 

 

 

The mold is harmless.

27. SECOND INITIATES’
BARRACKS

This room is in the same condition as room
#25. The only difference is that it contains the
remains of only 20 bunks.

ADVENTURE IN THE
RUINED MONASTERY

28. MONASTERY KITCHEN

 

 

A shattered oven and much broken pottery
lies about the room. In the southeast cor-
ner of the room is a large pile of what
appears to be garbage. Atop this pile are
two giant rats, squeaking loudly upon
hearing the door to the room open.

 

 

 

In two rounds, eight more rats charge into the
room through a small hole in the kitchen wall
that leads to the forest outside the monastery.

Giant Rats (10): AC 7; HD 1/2; hp 4,4,3,3,3,
2,2,2,1,1;MV 120’ (40’); 1 bite; D 1-3 +
disease; Save Fl; ML 8; ALN.


 

The rats have been using the kitchen as a lair,
storing their pile of apparent garbage here.
Most of the pile consists of tattered pieces of
leather, old bones, and many shiny pebbles,
but characters willing to dig through the filth
can find a few valuable items: three gems (60
gp, 40 gp, and 30 gp), 7 gp, 12 sp, 2 pp, and
an arrow +2.

29. MONASTIC LIBRARY

 

The walls of this chamber are lined with
debris-laden shelves. In the center of the
floor is a large pile of garbage.

 

 

 

The library was a storehouse of books and
papers—information gathered by the monks
over many centuries. Now the paper and
leather has crumbled; even the tables and
chairs have rotted and decayed. The garbage
pile was once more than 100 books of ancient
lore. Apparently, the rats have been using it as
a bed. No rats are currently in the room, and
nothing of value is hidden in the pile.

On a shelf at the end of the room (opposite
side from the door), however, hidden beneath
tattered works of literature, is an ivory tube,
worth 50 gp. The tube can only be discovered
through close examination of the shelves. A
screwed-in cap may be removed easily from
the tube to reveal a well-preserved piece of
parchment. Upon removal, any cleric recog-
nizes the parchment as a clerical scroll. It con-
tains the following spells:

First Level: cure light wounds (x2); detect

magic
Second Level: bless

30. GARDEN OF THE FOUNTAIN

 

No roof blocks the sun's rays from this part of
the monastery, where the atmosphere is peace-
ful and quiet. Around the perimeter of this
restful spot, placed in an orderly fashion, are
nine large birch trees. The ground is covered
by a thick cushion of grass and flowers. In the
center is a pool at whose south end a fountain
splashes into a shallow bowl. From a spout in
the bowl, the water flows back to the long
pool. The water is cool and crystal-clear. The
stones lining the sides and bottom of the pool
are glistening white, and reflections of the
birch leaves dance in the shimmering surface.

 

 

 

This garden was a place of great sacredness to
the monastery’s original inhabitants. As part
of his rite of initiation, each monk would be
allowed to take a drink from the fountain. He

would then be judged according to the effects
the water had upon him. The magical proper-
ties of the fountain still exist, and characters
wishing to drink from it may benefit or suffer
from its effects. A detect magic spell can iden-
tify a strong aura of enchantment from the
water in the shallow bowl. The water in the
pool, however, is quite mundane; even
though it flows from the fountain, somehow
its enchantment vanishes before the water
drops into the pool.

If a character takes a drink from the foun-
tain, calculate the effects by rolling 1d8 and
comparing the result to Table 4 (see below).
Each character may gain only one effect from
the water; any further drinks are simply thirst-
quenching.

All effects take place immediately; they are
permanent (except #3). Note that if a charac-
ter's constitution or dexterity is changed,
adjustments may need to be made to hit
points or armor class.

If the characters wish to rest in the garden,
or even spend the night here, they encounter
no wandering monsters.

TABLE 4
THE MAGIC FOUNTAIN

Die Roll Effect of Drink

 

 

1 Character subtracts one from all
ability scores.

2 Character loses one hit point. Sub-
tract this hit point from the charac-
ter’s total: the loss is not a wound!

3 Character is paralyzed for 2-20
(2d10) hours.

4 Character gains two hit points.

5 Character adds one to prime requi-
site score.

6 Character adds two to dexterity
score.

7 Character adds two each to strength
and dexterity scores.

8 Character adds one to each ability
score.

31. ANCIENT SANCTUARY

The door to this huge chamber bears the same
leering visage that was found on the door of
the tomb.

 

In this room, five giant statues of a long-
forgotten pagan god support the 20-foot
high ceiling with their heads. The floor is
smooth stone and very clean.

 

 

 



The two secret doors leading out of this cham-
ber may be discovered with the normal rolls.
Each of them can be opened by a simple push.

32. EMPTY ROOM

The door to this chamber is stuck and must be
smashed open. Smashing the door open yields
a 20% chance that ogres in room #33 hear the
disturbance and come to investigate.

 

Wooden and leather debris litters this
chamber; a thick layer of dust covers the
floor and all the room’s contents.

 

 

 

33. OGRE GUARDROOM

This room is inhabited by a pair of the ugliest
and meanest ogres to ever walk The Hill. They
spend most of their time drinking and gam-
bling, so there is a 50% chance that characters
who stop to listen can hear their raucous bel-
lows and heated arguments. The door to their
room is locked, and the key hangs on the belt
of the largest ogre.

Ogres (2): AC 5; HD 4 +1; hp 21,19; MV 90’
(30'); #AT 1 club; D 1-10; Save F4; ML 10;
ALC.

When discovered, the ogres are seated at a
large table in the middle of the room. (It may
be, of course, that they heard the party enter
room #32 and went to investigate.) Because
they are concentrating on rolling knuckle-
bones (crude, bone dice) on the table before
them, add one to their chance of being sur-
prised (i.¢., they are surprised if you roll one,
two, or three on 1d6).

The ogres fight savagely, but if they fail a
morale check, the surviving ogres surrender.

Three sturdy wooden beds are placed along
the north wall of the room; a jumble of old
bones—some of which look disturbingly
human—are piled against the south wall, and
a solid bar holds a door on the west wall firmly
shut. The large table, three chairs, and an old
trunk are the only other objects in the room.

Scattered about the top of the table, among
the knucklebones and spilled wineglasses, are
35 gp, 81 ep, and 124 sp. The trunk is locked;
the key is on a ring on the largest ogre’s belt.
The keys to rooms #33 and #34 are also on this
ring. Inside the trunk are five huge jugs of
wine, a sack holding 400 gp and 1,000 sp, and
a dirty leather sack that is actually a bag of
holding.


 

34. PRISON OF THE
NEANDERTHALS

The door to this room is barred on the outside
and locked. If it is opened, four male Nean-
derthals within are crouching belligerently, as
if prepared to fight with their bare hands.
They are quite surprised if any creatures other
than ogres open the door, and wait to see what
develops before attacking.

Neanderthals (4): AC 8; HD 2; hp 9 each; MV
120' (40'); #AT 1; D 2-8; Save F2; ML 7;
ALL.

These cavemen have been captured by ogres in
one of the frequent skirmishes between these
bands of mortal enemies. The peaceful Nean-
derthals have been trying to settle on The Hill
for several years, but the ogres’ depredations
during this time have made this difficult.

Since these four Neanderthals were cap-
tured but a week ago, and since they doubtless
would not have survived long in the hands of
ogres, they are grateful to anyone who frees
them. Although they will not understand the
PCs’ language, they try to communicate that
they consider the party to be valuable friends
(assuming the party doesn’t attack them, that
is!). If the party successfully rescues these pris-
oners, all of the Neanderthals on The Hill are
grateful, offering aid to the party whenever an
opportunity presents itself.

35. HOBGOBLIN SUPPLY ROOM

The door to this room is locked; the hobgob-
lin leader in room #38 carries the key. The lock
may be picked or the door smashed if the char-
acters wish to gain access.

 

This room contains a collection of supplies
that look sufficient for a small army. Six
bins, a dozen barrels, two crates, and three
racks are crammed into the large chamber.

 

 

 

The bins contain many bushels of dried
beans, grain, and fruit. The barrels hold the
same cheap wine that the ogres in room #33
were drinking. The racks hold an array of
weapons, including 20 shortswords, 25
swords, 30 spears, 10 crossbows, and 200
quarrels. Each of the crates holds two dozen
suits of leather armor, and 40 shields hang on
the walls of the room. All of the weapons and
armor are of a size that humans could use;
there is nothing to suggest that it is hobgob-
lins who are collecting and preparing to use
these supplies.

In truth, this room is a major collection

point for the supplies the hobgoblins are
gathering for a planned assault on Guido's
Fort. Since the destruction of this trove would
be a considerable setback to the attack plans,
consider awarding the PCs 200 experience
points if they successfully destroy the contents
of the room. They can do so by burning the
supplies, but in this case the hallway outside
fills with smoke two turns after the fire is lit,
and cannot be occupied for the next 12 turns.
Smoke spreads through the entire corridor,
right up to the doors to rooms #32 and #33,
but it does not penetrate into any rooms
whose doors are closed.

Note that the experience point bonus is
appropriate only if the characters take the initia-
tive to destroy the supplies. It’s important you
not give the party any suggestion to do so. Evena
question such as: “What are you going to do
with this stuff?” might be too suggestive.

36. ABANDONED CHAMBER

 

Except for a thick layer of dust on the floor,
this chamber appears totally empty.

 

 

 

This chamber is empty.

37. ANCIENT PAGAN ALTAR

 

This room is dominated by the image of
the leering pagan god, carved from a block
of granite. The gems that occupied its
eyesockets have already been plundered.
Before this statue is a shallow stone pit,
about 6 feet long, 3 feet wide, and 1 foot
deep.

 

 

 

The bloody cult of monks who once inhabited
the monastery used the pit for human sacrifice.

38. HOBGOBLIN GARRISON

 

Three hobgoblins and two goblins are
greedily feasting on a shank of meat at a
dirty table. Their weapons are close at
hand and they leap quickly to defend the
room.

 

 

 

This chamber serves as a guardroom and line
of defense to prevent unwelcome intruders
from discovering the entrance to the dungeon
below the monastery. Six hobgoblins and six
goblins are on duty here, protecting the
approach to their lair and hideout. Four of the
hobgoblins and four of the goblins are sleep-
ing when the party discovers this room; the
sleeping monsters require two rounds to arm



and prepare for battle.

Hobgoblins (6): AC 6; HD 1+1; hp
9,8,6,6,5, 4; MV 90’ (30'); #AT 1; D 1-8;
Save F1; ML 9(8); ALC

Goblins (6): AC 6; HD 1-1; hp 7,6,5,4,3,2;
MV 60' (20')’ #AT 1; D 1-6; Save NM; ML
9(6); ALC

The nine point hobgoblin carries a shield +1
(AC 5); his morale is 9 (instead of 8), and as long
as he is alive to spur the others on, all of the hob-
goblins and goblins also have morale 9.

The room has plain wooden bunks along each
wall; in the center are a table and two benches.
Each of the hobgoblins has a belt pouch contain-
ing 1d10 gp and 2d12 sp. The goblins also have
belt pouches, but they hold only 2d6 sp apiece.
The nine point hobgoblin carries the key to the
supply room (room #35) and the access room
(room #39) on a ring on his belt.

39. DUNGEON ACCESS ROOM

This small room contains only a stone stairway
leading downward into darkness. Characters
who have infravision may stand at the top of the
stairs and look down, but all they see is that the
stairway continues for more than 60 feet. The
stairs lead to the dungeon below the monastery.

ADVENTURE IN
DUNGEON LEVEL I

This level of the dungeon is the stronghold of
the goblins and hobgoblins preparing an
army. Although the troops have not been
assembled yet, there are enough goblins, hob-
goblins, and their large cousins the bugbears
here to keep the characters on their toes!

Since these humanoids dominate this level of
the dungeon, few other monsters are found.
Check for wandering monsters in the normal
way; if an encounter is indicated, roll a 1d6 and
compare the result to the table below.

Any monster encountered automatically
attacks the party, fighting until either the PCs
are defeated, all the monsters are dead, or the
monsters fail a morale check. In the latter
case, any surviving creatures flee toward room
#66 to alert the hobgoblin king.


 

TABLE 5

WANDERING MONSTERS
IN DUNGEON LEVEL I

Die Roll Creature Encountered

1-2 Bugbears (1-3): AC 5; HD 3 +1; hp
16,14, 13; MV 90’ (30'); #AT 1; D
2-8; Save F3; ML 9; ALC.

3-4 Goblins (2-8): AC 6; HD 1-1; hp
7,6,5, 5,4,3,2,1; MV 60'(20'); #AT
1; D 1-6; Save NM; ML 7; ALC.

5-6 Hobgoblins (1-4): AC 6; HD 1+1;
hp 8,6,6, 6,6,5; MV 90'(30'); #AT
1; D 1-8; Save F1; ML 8; AL C.

Key to areas in dungeon level I
40. BUGBEARS’ SITTING ROOM

 

In this dirty, vile-smelling chamber, a smoky
fire is dying in a large fireplace, and a kettle
holding some greenish-black stew simmers
over the coals. Three large wooden benches,
two chairs, and a table fill the room. On the
table is a large jug and three wine-stained
goblets, two of which are tipped over next to
asticky pool of wine. The goblets are crusted
with dried wine and dirt.

 

 

 

The wine goblets are made of silver, discern-
ible only if a character wipes the surface clean.
Each goblet is worth 30 gp.

41. EMPTY CELL

 

This room is empty except for a pair of
wooden bunks.

 

 

 

At one time, this cell held a pair of dwarves
that bugbears were fattening for a sinister pur-

. The secret door on the side of the room
is simply a block of stone the dwarves removed
to tunnel to freedom some years ago. The
bugbears don’t know how the dwarves got
out. If the bugbears take any of the characters
prisoner, the bugbears place at least two of the
characters in this cell.

42. BUGBEARS’ QUARTERS

The door to this chamber is locked; three bug-
bears reside within. They have just finished a
tiring shift of bullying goblins, so all three are
sound asleep.

If the characters can pick the lock, or smash
the door on the first try, they automatically
gain initiative. If they hit the door once with-

out breaking it open, however, the bugbears
are armed and waiting for them on the next
round.

Bugbears (3): AC 5; HD 3 +1; hp 15,13,10;
MV 90'(30'); #AT 1; D 1-8 +1 of 1-8 +2;
Save F3; ML 9; ALC.

One of the bugbears carries a battle axe +1;
the other two carry swords.

 

The room contains six large beds, a table
on which lie three empty bowls, and an old
but sturdy chest. On three of the beds lie
three large, apparently sleeping creatures.

 

 

 

The key to the chest and the key to this room
are on a thong around the neck of the 15 hit
point bugbear. Inside the chest is a suit of
leather armor; a shortsword; a bow, quiver,
and 16 arrows; a sack containing 120 sp, 30
ep, and 50 gp; and a backpack containing a
coil of rope, two flasks of oil, and a set of
thieves’ lock-picking tools.

43. PRISON CELL

In this dingy chamber is found one hapless
thief, captured by the bugbears on the out-
skirts of Guido’s Fort three weeks earlier. He
used to own most of the equipment found in
the bugbears’ chest (room #43).

Cullen DeFilch: AC 7; T2; hp 7; #AT 1; D by
weapon; Save T2; ML9; ALN; $ 10;18; W
13; D 16; C 9; CH 10.

If the characters release Cullen from his prison,
he is most grateful, happy to join the party for
the duration of the adventure. He does not ask
for a share of the loot, claiming that his freedom
is reward enough. If, however, he should be left
alone with a bag of jewels for example, there is
no guarantee that the bag remains as full as it
was to begin with . . .

If the characters are not interested in the
services of another thief. Cullen doesn’t try to
change their minds. He asks if the party has
seen any sign of his equipment, and if they
have he asks to have it returned. He does not
become hostile, however, feeling his position
to be too precarious to risk antagonizing his
rescuers. He simply leaves and tries to make
his way back to Guido's Fort if he is not
invited to join the party.

44. SUBTERRANEAN STREAM

This natural cavern is blocked by a solid wood-
en door—watertight but unlocked.

 

A shallow stream runs through this room,
falling from a spout in the ceiling, running
through a trench in the cavern floor, and
rushing out through an opening in the
floor. The stream is about eight feet wide
and one foot deep.

 

 

 

Lurking in the shadows where the stream dis-
appears through the floor are three giant cen-
tipedes. As soon as they catch sight of
intruders in the room, they rush forward to
attack.

Giant Centipedes (3): AC 9; HD 1/2; hp 3,2,
2; MV 60'(20'); #AT 1; D poison; Save
NM; ML7: ALN.

Although the level of the stream is low now,
stains on the walls indicate that it often fills
the room to a depth of three or four feet. The
spout in the ceiling is only one foot in diame-
ter, and the stream disappears through a four-
foot diameter hole in the floor. The hole in
the floor drops through 60 feet of a winding,
narrow shaft, before entering a large cavern
totally filled with water.

If any characters are foolish enough to drop
into this shaft, roll 346 to see how much dam-
age they take before they enter the flooded
chamber. If they are still alive, they certainly
drown there.

45. TORTURE CHAMBER

 

A torture rack, an iron maiden, and a huge
pot of bubbling oil all give good indication
of this room’s purpose. Feeding the fire
beneath the oil are two goblins.

 

 

 

Goblins (2): AC 6; HD 1-1; hp 4,3; MV 60’
(20'); #AT 1; D 1-6; Save NM; ML7; ALC.

Along the southern wall of the room are four
cells, each with a metal door. Each door has a
barred window, persumably to let prisoners
watch the “entertainment.” Mercifully, all of
the cells are empty of living creatures,
although a moldering skeleton lies on the bed
in the far east cell. A ring bearing a large iron
key hangs on the wall of the chamber. An
examination shows that the key opens all four
cell doors.

46. CLERIC’S OFFICE
The door to this chamber is locked.


 

 

In this room a polished circular table, a
fur-lined bench, a desk, and a chair give
the room a civilized look. An elaborate
candelabra, made out of silver and worth
50 gp, rests on the table. On the desk is a
miniature statue of the same god whose
likeness is found throughout the ruined
monastery. This statue has been carved

 

 

from pumice (hardened lava).

 

The desk has two drawers in it. The top drawer
opens easily, and contains an inkwell, several
quill pens, and a dozen blank sheets of parch-
ment. The second drawer is locked and
trapped with a poisoned needle. Any charac-
ter picking the lock without removing the trap
is pricked by the needle and must save vs. poi-
son or die, The small amount of poison on the
needle allows the character a +3 to his or her
saving throw, however.

In the locked drawer is a small pouch con-
taining seven gems worth 200 gp each and a
rolled up parchment. If examined by a cleric,
the parchment is recognized as a clerical scroll
on which is written a cure light wounds spell.

47. CLERIC’S SITTING ROOM

The hall door leading to this room is locked,
although the secret door on the west wall of
the room pushes open easily.

 

The floor of this room is padded by several
huge bearskins, and four soft chairs sur-
round a low table. On the walls are niches
for two dozen candles, and a shelf holding
four crystal goblets and two bottles of
wine.

 

 

 

The goblets are worth 50 gp each, and the
wine, 80 gp per bottle. Both the goblets and
the wine bottles are fragile, however, and
there is a 20% chance they break each time
any character carrying them is involved in a
violent situation (combat or fall, for exam-
ple).

48. CLERIC’S CHAMBER

The door to this room is not locked. (Its
inhabitant—the foul cleric Moray Vaco—feels
quite secure behind his many secret doors.)

 

A table, bed, and several chairs are visible
in this room. Seated at the table, a
hunched and scrawny figure is apparently
writing on a sheet of parchment.

 

 

 

Moray Vaco: AC 2; C3; hp 12; #AT 1; D 2-7;

Save C3; ALC; § 12; 110; W 16; D 12; C
9; CH 6; +2 to saving throws (wisdom
adjustment).

Spells: First Level: protection from evil, detect
magic.

Moray uses a mace + 1 in combat. His mace is
always at his side, and he is always wearing his
plate mail armor. If discovered in his room,
Moray fights to the death.

This human cleric is a degenerate and filthy
individual of thoroughly chaotic alignment.
He has stayed so long with the goblins he has
even begun to resemble them: his skin has
taken on a gray hue, and he has filed his teeth
to points.

Moray Vaco is one of the last survivors of the
black-hearted cult that founded the monas-
tery centuries ago. Lacking human followers,
he has gathered a congregation of evil mon-
sters. He provides the monsters “spiritual
guidance” and “moral leadership,” and they
provide him protection, food, and an occa-
sional prisoner to be sacrificed to Moray’s iniq-
uitous deity.

The parchment on Moray's desk is covered
with foul chants in an ancient tongue. Hidden
beneath his bed is a long, locked box contain-
ing 120 sp, 40 ep, 30 gp, an elven cloak, anda
bottle filled with a potion of invisibility. The
key to this box, the keys to rooms #46 and
#47, and the key to the locked desk drawer in
room #46 are on a ring on Moray’s belt.

49. METAL FORGING SHOP

 

Four huge furnace fires burn along the
west wall of this large room. The air is sooty
and smoky. The fires are heating various
pieces of metal, which are being forged
into swordblades and spearheads. Working
in this forge are eight hobgoblins, one
bugbear, and a very dirty dwarf, impris-
oned by a ball and a chain attached to his
ankle.

 

 

The bugbear oversees the operation of the
foundry, cursing and bellowing at the hob-
goblins and dwarf. The hobgoblins are tend-
ing the fires (one per fire) and carrying ingots
of iron from the pile next to the east wall. Two
are next to the pile of ingots, and two are next
to the northernmost fire. The dwarf is ham-
mering at a swordblade at the southernmost
fire. The positions of all these creatures are
marked on the dungeon map as follows: D =
dwarf; B = bugbear; and H = hobgoblin.

When the characters enter this room, the
bugbear and hobgoblins immediately drop
what they are doing and attack. The dwarf
does the same, as soon as he catches sight of
the party, but he directs his attacks toward the
monsters. He throws his hammer at the bug-
bear (for 1-6 (1d6) points of damage) and
snatches up a second hammer with which to
beat the nearest hobgoblin (for 2-7 (1d6 +1)
points of damage—strength bonus).

The foundry is being used to manufacture
weapons for the army now being recruited.
The dwarf has been a prisoner for nearly a
year, his skill as a smith has kept the hobgob-
lins from killing him. Given the chance, he
fights savagely for his freedom, and offers to
join the party on the rest of the adventure if
they so desire. Assuming that the PCs are vic-
torious in this battle and that they free the
dwarf, he takes a shield from one of the dead
hobgoblins (becoming AC 6), but his ham-
mer remains his weapon of preference.

In addition to the fireplaces, the forge room
contains two large piles of iron bars, a pile of
firewood, a smaller pile of coal, and a rack of
metalworking tools (tongs, hammers, anvils,
prybars).

50. DWARF’S CELL

This cell, at the far south side of the forge
room is where the dwarf has been kept. It con-
tains a simple bed, table, and a chair.

51. GOBLIN ARENA

 

Bugbear (1): AC 5; HD 3+1; hp 16; MV 90’
(30'); #AT 1; D 2-8; Save F3; ML9; ALC.

Hobgoblins (8): AC 6; HD 1+1; hp
9,8,7,6,5, 4,3,2; MV 90’ (30'); #AT 1; D
1-6; Save F1; ML 8; AL C.

Gareth Ironhand: AC 7; D 2; hp 13; #AT 1;D
2-7; Save D2; ALL; $ 13,110, W9,D 12,
C 16, CH8.

The bugbear carries a large club, the hobgob-

lins wear shortswords, and the dwarf wears a

leather apron and carries a larger hammer.



Torches placed on the walls at frequent
intervals light this chamber. Two massive
stone columns rise from the arena floor to
support the roof. The arena floor is 10 feet
below the level of the hallway. Lying in a
circle in the center of the arena, and hardly
recognizable from the upper deck, are four
bodies.

 

 

 

If the characters approach for a closer look,
they see that all of the bodies have been
pierced by many arrows, but they have not


been dead for long. As the characters
approach, two shadowy forms advance from
behind one of the columns to stand by the
bodies and growl menacingly at the PCs. They
are two wolves trained as war dogs.

Wolves (2): AC 7; HD 2+2; hp 12,11; MV
180' (60'); #AT 1; D 1-6; Save F1; ML 8;
ALN.

The dogs were trained by the party of adven-
turers now lying dead upon the arena floor.
The canines are very loyal creatures, remain-
ing here to guard their masters. The dogs look
scrawny and underfed.

Certainly, the PCs can attack the dogs if
they want, but the dogs do not attack the
characters unless one of them actually touches
one of the dead bodies. If the party advances
to the corpses, the dogs growl and bristle, but
slowly back away as long as the characters
remain calm and do not disturb the bodies. If
a character speaks to the dogs in a calm voice
and offers them food, they both eat hungrily.
From that moment on, they regard the person
who fed them as their master or mistress, even
to the point of letting that individual examine
the bodies of their former masters.

From weapons, armor, and clothing, exam-
ination reveals the four bodies to have been
two fighters, a thief, and a magic-user. Each
fighter wore plate mail armor and carried
swords, longbows, and 2d10 arrows. The thief
wore leather armor and was armed with a
shortsword +1 and a dagger. The magic-user
was unarmed, though a ring of protection + 1
encircles his little finger. None of them carried
any monetary treasure.

The dogs have been trained to obey the fol-
lowing commands: “kill,” which causes them
to attack ferociously, gaining +1 to all dam-
age rolls: ‘stay,’ which causes them to remain
in place for at 1d4x6 turns if not counter-
manded; “‘fetch,’ which causes them to
advance and pick up an object, without harm-
ing it; “guard,” which causes them to eye a
creature suspiciously, without harming it
unless it moves (if it moves, the dogs respond
in the same was as if told to “kill”); and
“stop,” which negates the “kill” and ‘‘fetch”
commands. The dogs also act on their own ini-
tiative to warn of impending danger.

52. SUPPLY ROOM

The door to this room is locked; the hobgob-
lin king in room #66 keeps the key. If charac-
ters succeed in picking the lock or smashing
the door, they find provisions within to sup-
port a good-sized army for several months.

 

Bales and boxes line the entire perimeter
of this room, except for the space in front
of the door.

 

 

 

Moving clockwise around the room, the boxes
and bales contain: cured leather, four by four
foot pieces; grain from corn, wheat, and oats;
salt; dried beans; nails; thousands of arrow-
heads; thousands of fresh torches; 20 coils of
rope, 100 feet to each coil; 200 woolen cloaks;
800 iron spikes; 200 backpacks; 50 wooden
poles, each 10 feet long; and 100 small sacks.
This trove is obviously valuable to the hob-
goblins, so it is recommended that the charac-
ters receive bonus experience points if they
manage to destroy it. Consider awarding 400
points if the destruction is total; scale the
number down for less effective sabotage.

53. DINING HALL
The doors to room #53 are locked.

 

In this large room, four long tables, each
bracketed by a pair of benches, easily iden-
tify the room's purpose. Two of the tables
are covered with dirty bowls and spilled
wine, as if a meal had been eaten recently.

 

 

 

If the characters enter this room before they
enter the kitchen (room #54), then one round
after the characters enter this room, the door
to room #54 swings open; two very small gob-
lins carrying large, empty trays stroll in. They
squeak with fright at the sight of the intruders
and rush back from whence they came to alert
two other goblins in room #54; all four then
rush into the hall to alert the guards in room
#57, The guards appear in three rounds. If the
characters have already been to room #54, the
goblins will already have alerted the guards.

Goblins (4): AC 6; HD 1-1; hp 2,2,1,1; MV
60' (20’); No attacks or damage; Save NM;
ML 7; ALC.

54. KITCHEN

The door to the kitchen is locked.

 

This room contains a large oven, two cook-
stoves, and a pantry filled with dried
beans, grain, some stale bread, and 50
cheap ceramic bowls.

 

 

 

If the characters come into this room before
they enter the dining hall (room #53), four
goblins run out of the kitchen, through the

dining hall, and into the hallway. From here,
the goblins will rush to alert the guards. The
guards will appear in eight rounds.

55. PAGAN TEMPLE

The double doors to this chamber are
unlocked and swing open easily. Any lawful
cleric entering this room feels chills ran down
his or her spine. This effect may be unsettling,
but it is harmless.

 

In this room, seven sets of bare wooden
benches face a raised dais, upon which sits
the likeness of the same hideous god
encountered several other times. This
statue is carved from pumice, rather than
the granite.

 

 

 

Two glittering gems adorn the eyesockets of
this statue. Each is a fist-sized stone worth 300
gp, but they are set very firmly. Any character
not wearing metal armor can scramble up the
statue to pry the gems loose, but it takes
2d6 +2 rounds to remove each one. Only one
character at a time may try to loosen the gems.

Each gem is hooked to an elaborate trap,
which is sprung unless removed by a thief.
Note that each gem’s trap must be removed
individually. If a trap is sprung, the statue's
mouth drops open and four robber flies buzz
angrily into the room. They attack the charac-
ters randomly, although one is certain to go
after the character stealing the gems.

Robber Flies (4): AC 6; HD 2; hp 10,8,8,6;

MV 180 (60'); #AT 1; D 1-8; Save F1; ML
8; ALN.

56. SMALL SECRET CHAMBER

 

This small chamber contains only a ladder
disappearing through a hole in the floor.

 

 

 

If the characters climb down the ladder, they
see a small tunnel (three feet wide and five
feet high) leading due north for 30 feet. A
strong smell of carrion hangs in the air. At the
end of the corridor is the cage in which the
robber flies were kept. A simple calculation
shows it is directly under the statue in room
#55. If the statue’s traps have been sprung,
the cage is empty except for a rotting piece of
unidentifiable meat.

57. READY ROOM

The doors to this room are unlocked.


A group of goblins and hobgoblins are
seated around two tables and three wood-
en benches. A few coins are scattered
about the tabletops.

 

 

 

The room is a place for a complement of gob-
lin and hobgoblin guards to wait while they
are “‘on call.” The guards are fully armed and
armored, and respond quickly to any threat to
their stronghold.

Hobgoblins (4): AC 6; HD 1+1; hp 9,7,6,5;
MV 90' (30'); #AT 1; D 1-8; Save Fl; ML 8;
ALC.

Goblins (4): AC 6; HD 1-1; hp 6,5,5,3; MV
60' (20'); #AT 1; D 1-6; Save NM; ML 7;
ALC.

If the party attacks, one of the hobgoblins
tries to slip out the back door to alert the hob-
goblins in room #65. The other guards fight a
delaying action until reinforcements arrive. It
takes five rounds for the hobgoblins to arm
themselves and run to the fight.

The coins on the tables include 13 gp and
25 sp on one table and 24 gp and 51 sp on the
other.

58. AVIARY

 

This room is actually a giant birdcage.
Having heard the door open, a flock of
brightly colored birds have taken to the air
from a number of perches. They utter
piercing shrieks as they zoom toward you.

 

 

 

The hobgoblin king has captured a flock of
deadly piranha birds, and keeps them here,
feeding them only rarely. They are half-
starved and ravenously attack any creature so
unfortunate as to have opened the door to the
foom.

Piranha Birds (8): AC 6; HD 1/2; hp 4, 4, 3,
3, 2, 2, 1, 1,; MV 180’ (60’) flying; #AT 1;
D 1-4; Save NM; ML 8; ALN.

For a complete description of piranha birds,
see New Monsters.

On the south wall of the room is a series of
closely-spaced bars that blocks the opening to
a secret door. It is from here the piranha birds
are fed. A small gate in the bars may be
opened to allow access to the cage, but it is too
small for a character—even a halfling—to pass
through.

59. BATTLEROOM

 

This room is void of furniture. The bodies
of two humans who obviously died vio-
lently are sprawled across the floor. One is
wearing plate mail and carries a shield and
a sword whose blade is broken; the tip of
the sword lies across the room from the
body. Strapped to his back is a quiver hold-
ing a dozen arrows and a longbow. The
other dead human is wearing deeply
gashed, leather armor. A shortsword lies
on the floor near his body.

 

 

 

The longbow is actually a longbow +1. Both
corpses show signs of mutilation, having been
partially devoured by a thoul in room #60. In
fact, for every turn the party spends in room
#59, there is one chance in four the thoul
comes into the room from the secret door con-
necting rooms #59 and #60. If the thoul
charges in, both the PCs and the thoul should
check for surprise. Chances are one in two that
if the thoul comes through the secret door, he
trips over a third corpse: the invisible body of
a dead magic-user lying directly in front of the
secret door.

The dead magic-user is invisible because of
a ring of invisibilily he wears. The body can
only be discovered by using a detect magic
spell or by stumbling into it. If the party
searches the room, chances are one in five per
character that someone stumbles into the
body. If a character states he or she is searching
the room’s east wall for secret doors, the char-
acter is sure to stumble over the corpse. The
magic-user’s body has no value save the magi-
cal ring.

60. LAIR OF THE THOUL

 

A lone hobgoblin appears to be the only
occupant of this otherwise empty room.
He is squatting in a corner gnawing on an
old bone.

 

 

 

The hobgoblin is actually a thoul.

Thoul (1): AC 6; HD 3**; hp 13; MV 120’
(40'); #AT 2 claws; D 1-3/1-3 + paralysis;
Save F3; ML 10; AL C; regenerates 1 hp/
round.

The thoul attacks intruders with savage inten-
sity, attempting to paralyze as many characters
as possible by attacking a different individual
cach turn. The thoul has nothing of value in
its room.

THE HOBGOBLIN KING

61. PARTIAL STATUE
The door to this chamber is not locked.

 

The only item in this room is a huge block
of pumice. The top half of the block is
carved into the likeness of the pagan god
encountered elsewhere. The bottom half is
still shapeless.

 

 

 

62. TRAPDOORS

These 40-foot long trapdoors are activated from
the throne room of the hobgoblin king (room
#66). The doors do not open as long as someone
is seated on the throne, as is the case the first
time the characters come down this hall.

When the seat is vacant, the weight of four
characters causes the doors to swing open,
plummeting those four characters down a
300-foot chute below the trap and depositing
them in room #70 (dungeon level II) through
a hole in the room’s ceiling. There is a 75%
chance any characters walking immediately
behind the four also fall into the chute. Any
characters who do not fall into the chute are
isolated in this dead-end section of the
dungeon, though they can still shout to their
fallen compatriots below.

Characters falling through the trap acci-
dently take 1-3 points of damage each from
the jostling and bouncing on the way down
the long, curving chute. Characters falling on
purpose can slide all the way down without
incurring any damage. Characters who fall on
purpose can communicate the safety of the
slide to characters still above.

The chute is very smooth-sided; it is impos-
sible to climb back up—even by a thief who
successfully rolls to climb sheer surfaces. A
levitation or fly spell could get one character
up, but getting the whole party up this way
would be a slow and awkward process—even if
the party has enough spells to make it possi-
ble. If some characters remain above, a long
coil of rope could be used to pull the fallen
characters back up, but it is much more likely
all the characters will slide down the chute to
continue the adventure.

63. HOBGOBLIN HALL

 

This room is obviously a drinking and
meeting hall for a degenerate band of
monsters or humanoids. It is empty of
creatures now, but many signs of use are in
evidence. Chairs have been pulled careless-
ly back from the long tables, and spilled

 

 

 


 

 

tankards of wine lie on both the tables and
the floor. A sooty fireplace at the north end
of the room holds but ashes. There is noth-
ing of value in this room except for three
shields hanging on pegs on the wall.

 

 

 

This room is the meeting hall for the hobgob-
lin king and his band. The ashes in the fire-
place are warm to the touch.

64. HOBGOBLIN SLEEPING
QUARTERS (EMPTY)
This chamber waits behind a locked door.

 

In this room, 14 filthy bunks show signs of
recent habitation. Each of the beds has a
mattress of moldy straw, and a blanket on

 

top.

 

 

Any character prodding the blankets, or pick-
ing them up and moving them, has a 50%
chance of hosting a band of fleas. Characters
so infested need 1d6+1 rounds to brush the
fleas off. If attacked, flea-infested characters
may fight normally, but nothing other than
combat allows them to stop brushing off the
fleas.

If the party smashed in the door to this
room before they have investigated the room
across the hall (room #65), the chances are
three in four they wake up 14 hobgoblins
sleeping there. The hobgoblins dress and arm
themselves, bursting out of room #65 and
into room #64 in two rounds.

65. HOBGOBLIN SLEEPING
QUARTERS (OCCUPIED)

This chamber is identical to room #64, except
that 14 hobgoblins are sleeping on the bunks
around the room. The hobgoblins are armed
and ready for combat one round after awaken-
ing, but the PCs automatically gain initiative
on that round.

Hobgoblins (14): AC 6; HD 1 +1; hp 9, 8, 8,
7, 7, 6, 6, 5, 5,4, 4, 3, 3, 2; MV 90’ (30');
#AT 1; D 1-8; Save Fl; ML 8; ALC.

Each hobgoblin is armed with a sword and

protected by a shield.

Since they are mistrustful even of each other,
each hobgoblin’s valuables are kept in a small
pouch around his waist. The pouch contains
2d6 gp, 2d6 ep, and 2d6 sp.

66. HALL OF THE HOBGOBLIN
KING

The huge double doors to this room are not
locked. This chamber is where the hobgoblin

king holds sway over his minions on and in
The Hill.

 

A huge hobgoblin is seated on the throne
at the south end of the chamber. One hob-
goblin bodyguard is standing to each side
of the throne. Four other hobgoblins are
seated around a huge fire burning in the
center of the room; two more hobgoblins
are drawing liquid from a keg in the south-
west corner of the room. Apparently, some
kind of party is going on because the atmo-
sphere in the room is festive.

 

 

 

Hobgoblin King (1): AC 6; HD 5; hp 22; MV
90' (30'); #AT 1; D 1-8+2; Save F5; ML
12: ALG.

Hobgoblin Bodyguards (2): AC: 6; HD 4; hp
17,14; MV 90' (30); #AT 1; D 1-6/1-6 +1;
Save F4; ML 10 (8); ALC.

Hobgoblins (6): AC 6; HD 1+1; hp 9, 7, 6,
5, 3, 2; MV 90'(30’); #AT 1; D 1-8; Save
Fi; ML 10 (8); ALC.

The king’s personal bodyguards are armed
with spears, one of which is a spear +1. The
king is wearing a ring of fire resistance, so he is
invulnerable to normal fires and gains a bonus
when saving against magical fires.

When the doors to the room are open, the
hobgoblin king shouts a warning and orders
his soldiers to attack. As long as the king is
alive, the hobgoblins fight with a morale of
10; if the king is killed, they fight with a
morale of eight.

The fire in the center of the room is heating
a large kettle of boiling liquid, which vaguely
resembles soup. In fact, it is soup, but the
characters find it rancid and foul-tasting,
though not poisonous. The smoke from the
fire is vented through a large hole in the ceil-
ing.

Each of the eight hobgoblins has a belt
pouch containing a few coins: 2d6 gp,
1d10ep, and 3d6 sp for each pouch. On his
belt, the king carries a ring of keys, including
those to the doors of rooms #68 and #69, and
to the chests in room #69. The hobgoblin
bodyguard who carries a magical spear carries
on his belt the key to the chest in room #67.

67. BODYGUARD CHAMBER

Room #67 is the chamber of the two hobgob-
lin bodyguards.



 

‘Two soft beds, a table, two chairs, and a chest
are the only items of furniture in this room.
The table holds a bottle of wine and two
glasses.

 

 

 

The chest is locked; the bodyguard who carries
the magical spear has the key on his belt. In
the chest are two woolen cloaks; a large sack
containing 120 gp, 60 ep, and 200 sp; two
swords; and a jeweled necklace worth 800 gp.
The wine on the table is high quality.

68. BEDROOM OF THE KING

 

A large, plush bed, a table, a wooden
chair, and two soft armchairs constitute the
furniture in this room. Three woolen tap-
estries hang on the walls.

 

 

 

Although of rather shoddy craftsmanship, the
tapestries are colorful and worth 50 gp apiece.
They depict battle scenes in which hobgoblin
exploits are prominently featured.

69. TREASURE ROOM

A secret door to room #69 may be discovered
by the normal roll. Turning a loose stone in
the wall reveals a key socket. If the key is used,
or if a thief can pick the lock, the door swings
open easily.

 

This tiny room is empty except for two
large chests.

 

 

 

The keys to these chests are on the belt of the
hobgoblin king. Each chest is trapped with a
poison needle, activated if a thief picks the
lock without removing the trap. If the trap is
activated, the thief must save vs. poison or
die. Using the proper key opens the chests
without activating the trap.

The first chest contains coins of many dif-
ferent types, including 58 pp, 230 gp, 170 ep,
480 sp, and 1,290 cp. The coins are mixed
together; trying to sort them takes three turns.
The second chest contains four bottles of
murky liquid—three bottles of potion of heal-
ing and one bottle potion of invisibility—and
a pearl necklace worth 1,000 gp.

ADVENTURE IN
DUNGEON LEVEL II

As explained in the description of area #62,
characters gain entrance to this dungeon level
by falling through the trapdoors in the corri-
dor outside the chamber of the hobgoblin


 

king (room #66).

It takes a steady hand to map this level of
the dungeon—a mass of twisting and turning
tunnels, Each has rough, rocky walls, a 10-
foot high ceiling, and are clean of debris (a
gelatinous cube regularly sweeps all areas of
this level). Many tunnels slope gradually up or
down, crossing over or under other tunnels
the party is not aware of. Whenever two corri-
dors intersect on the map, one is shown by
dotted lines; the other is marked by the usual
solid lines. The corridors marked by dotted
lines pass under the corridors marked by solid
lines.

If a dwarf wants to check for sloping pas-
sages, examine the party’s location on the
map. If the group is within 60 feet of inter-
secting solid and dotted lines, and if the dwarf
is successful on his roll, consult the map again.
If the passage the PCs are on is underneath
another tunnel, the slope is down; if the pas-
sage is on top of another tunnel, the slope is
up. Of course, if the dwarf asks for a check at
time when the party is not within 60 feet of an
intersection, you roll for him anyway, but the
result is always “no slope.”

When giving the characters descriptions of
the twists and turns of these tunnels for map-
ping purposes, don’t be too specific. Direc-
tions such as: “The corridor is gradually
bending to the “left,” or “You come around a
sharp curve to the right” is adequate, unless
the characters ask for more specific terms. If
they do, explain to the characters that
demanding such precision is slowing them
down. Try to estimate the angle of a curve (90
degrees, 45 degrees, etc.) as closely as possi-
ble, but remember that the party isn’t going
to measure the exact angle anyway, so slight
inaccuracies are inevitable.

This level is never traveled by the hobgob-
lins; in fact, they have no knowledge of the
creatures living here or the makeup of the
dungeon. The creatures on this level are a
crazed and half-starved lot, living a desperate
and hungry existence: they are quick to
assault any potential meal.

Many packs of rats scuttle about, living in
tiny holes in the walls of the tunnels. The rats
are the staple food of the residents of this area.
The rats are used to running for their lives, so
they never attack a character. You might men-
tion occasionally that the party hears the rats
squeaking or scratching, but the party never
actually sees them.

Desperate for food, certain creatures roam
the corridors. The chance of encountering a
group of these wandering monsters is calcu-
lated as usual at the end of every two turns. If
an encounter is indicated, roll 1d6 and com-

pare the result to Table 6.
Key to Areas in Dungeon Level II

TABLE 6

WANDERING MONSTERS
IN DUNGEON LEVEL II

Die Roll Creature Encountered

1 Piranha Birds (4-8): AC 6; HD 1/2;
bp 4), 45S yiFi 25 2h dy 16 ev
180'(60') flying; #AT 1; D 1-4; Save
NM; ML 8; ALN.

2 Robber Flies (1-4): AC 6; HD 2; hp
12, 10, 9, 7; MV 180’ (60’) flying;
#AT 1; D 108; Save Fl; ML8; ALN.

3 Thoul (1): AC 6; HD 3**; hp 14;
MV 120’ (40'); #AT 2 claws; D 1-3/
1-3 + paralysis; Save F3; ML 10; AL
Cc

4 Bugbears (1-4); AC 5; HD 3 +1; hp
14, 12, 11, 9; MV 90'(30'); #AT 1;
D 2-8; Save F3; ML 9; ALC.

5 Ogres (1-2): AC 5; HD 4+1; hp 19,
16; MV 90'(30'); #AT 1; D 1-10;
Save F4; ML 10; ALC.

6 Berserkers (1-4): AC 7; HD 1+1*;
hp 9, 7, 6, 4; MV 120’ (40); #AT 1
at +2; D 1-8; Save Fl; ML 12; AL
N.

71. BUGBEARS’ CAVE

A rank smell emanates from this cave. If the
PCs come within 30 feet of the cave, the odds
are one in three they become aware of both
the smell and the cave.

 

In this dirty chamber, three large and furry
humanoids are squatting listlessly. As they
see you, they yell a challenge and spring to
their feet.

 

 

 

The trio of bugbears accidentally fell down
the trap chute several months earlier; they
claimed the cave and attack humans and
demi-humans on sight.

Bugbears (3): AC 5; HD 3+1; hp 16,13,13;
MV 90'(30'); #AT 1; D 2-8; Save F3; ML9;
ALC.

The bugbears fight with huge, knotty pieces

of wood they use as clubs. They have no cloth-

ing, armor, or anything else of value.

72. LARGE CAVERN

 

The ceiling to this large chamber is 20 feet
high. The floor is clean of debris.

 

 

 

73. CHAMBER OF THE
MAN-EATERS

 

70. OCTAGONAL ROOM

 

After bumping and sliding down the
chute, you land on the floor of an eight-
sided room, a wooden door on each side.

 

 

 

One of the doors (roll 1d8 to determine which
one) opens 1d6 rounds after the characters
land in the room; two men, filthy and unshav-
en, run wildly into the room, a maniacal
expression in their eyes. In fact, they are ber-
serkers and attack the party on sight.

Berserkers (2): AC 7; HD 1+1*; hp 7,5: MV
120'(40'); #AT 1 at +2; D 1-8; Save F1;
ML 12; ALN.

One of the berserkers is wearing leather armor

+1(AC 6).

These two are part of a group of humans who
have been wandering through the labyrinth of
this level for many years. They have forgotten
any human language they ever knew, commu-
nicating in a series of grunts, hoots, and
shouts.



This large cavern appears to be empty. The
ceiling is high, and the far end curves out
of sight.

 

 

 

This chamber is the lair of a band of ghouls
who happily eat humans or any other vaguely
warm-blooded creature that they can sink
their filthy claws into. Though the cave
appears to be empty from its entrance, around
the bend in the wall lurk the cave’s four cha-
otic (and hungry!) inhabitants.

Ghouls (4): AC 6; HD 2*; hp 13, 11, 10, 8;
MV 90! (30'); #AT 2 claws/1 bite; D 1-3/
1-3/1-3 + paralyze; Save F2; ML9; ALC.

The ghouls are squatting around a pile of mis-
cellaneous bones at the spot marked by an X
on the map. Unless the characters are very
noisy, check normally for surprise. In any case,
the ghouls attack the characters on sight.
Garbage the ghouls have collected lies piled
against the wall next to their pile of bones.
Most of the garbage is merely old belt buckles,
links from chain mail, strapless shields, and
the like. A few items of value might be turned


 

up, however, if the characters wish to dig
through the refuse. Valuables include 23pp in
an old sack; 80 gp, 100 sp, and 200 cp scat-
tered around the floor; a jeweled necklace
worth 100 gp; and a battered, corroded sword
that is actually a shortsword +2. The sword is
not recognizable as a magical weapon unless
considerable time is spent scraping the corro-
sion off of the blade. However, it functions
with its +2 bonus whether it is cleaned or not.

74, SECRET CHAMBER

The two secret doors leading into this room,
and the secret door connecting the room to
room #75, are opened by rotating a small out-
crop of rock in the center of the door.

 

Several small flying creatures dart from the
door, zooming toward you. You can see
several more of these bird-like things
immediately behind the first ones. The

room beyond appears to be empty.

 

 

 

When an entry door is opened, each character
standing in the doorway is attacked by two
stirges apiece. The rest of these blood-sucking
parasites fly past the first rank of characters to
find sustenance from those in the rearward
ranks. All the stirges make an attack on the
first round out of the chamber.

Stirges (8): AC 7; HD 1*; hp 8, 7, 6, 5, 4, 3,
2, 1; MV 180'(60"); #AT 1; D 1-3; Save F2;
ML 9; ALN.

These birdlike predators have been living off
the rats that occasionally enter their chamber
through small holes. The stirges haven't had a
decent meal in years; they try eagerly to attack
any character so unfortunate as to have
released the parasites from their cavern.

75. SECRET TREASURE ROOM

The secret door to this chamber is opened the
same way as are the two doors leading into
room #74. From the vantage point of the
secret door, room #75 appears empty; a char-
acter must advance down a short hallway to
see the chamber’s contents.

 

In an alcove along the room's western wall
lie three small, wooden chests. Each is fit-
ted with a sturdy lock.

 

 

 

The first chest contains coins of all types: 38
Pp, 120 gp, 70 ep, 250 sp, and 1,000 cp. The
second holds valuables made of silver, gold,
and gems: a silver pitcher and 6 goblets (200

gp), a fabulous jeweled necklace (400 gp), a
bracelet (200 gp), a bejeweled dagger (100
gp), and a golden serving tray (300 gp). The
third chest contains potent magical items: a
bottle each of potion of diminution and poi-
son, two bottles of potion of healing, a sword
+1, asuit of plate mail + 1, and a ring of fire
resistance.

76. CAVERN OF THE GIANT
SHREWS

 

In a far-north alcove of this chamber lies a
large pile of leather and cloth.

 

 

 

Inside the pile are three adult shrews and six
young. As the leading character advances into
the room, the adult shrews bound out in fury,
lashing at the intruders with razor-sharp
teeth. The young are too small to engage in
combat.

Giant Shrews (3): AC 4; HD 1; hp 6, 4, 3; MV
180'(60'); #AT 2 bites; D 1-6/1-6; Save F1;
ML 10; ALN.

Note that giant shrews always gain initiative
on their first attack; for their second attack,
they gain +1 to their initiative roll. A silence
15’ radius spell will “blind” them, since they
use batlike radar to find their way about the
darkness.

77. OWL BEAR DEN

 

This long cavern winds back into darkness.
The air feels moist here.

 

 

 

This cavern contains a well of fresh, cool
water, and an owl bear.

Owl Bear (1): AC 5; HD 5; hp 22; MV 120’
(40'); #AT 2 claws, 1 bite; D 1-8/1-8/1-8;
Save F3; ML 9; ALN; can “hug” for extra
damage.

The owl bear is jealously possessive of its den,
and will attack and attempt to maul any char-
acters who stroll through the entrance. The
bear will be resting at the spot marked with an
X on the maps so that it has a view of the
mouth of its den. When it attacks, the owl
bear will direct both of its claw attacks and its
bite to the same character, repeating the
attack until that character has been killed
before selecting a new victim. It will not pur-
sue characters beyond the mouth of its cave if
it has already killed one; if not, it will pursue



until it slays a character. It will then cease pur-
suit and drag the corpse back to its den.

78. BERSERKER’S HOVEL

This cavern has been claimed by the small
band of insane humans struggling to survive
the dungeon. Two of these fellows the party
met in room #70. Although some of the ber-
serkers are out wandering the tunnels, the PCs
find five in this chamber.

Berserkers (5): AC 7 (5); HD 1+1*; hp 9, 7,
7, 6, 5; MV 12'(40'); #AT 1 at +2; D 1-8;
Save Fl; ML 12; ALN.

The nine hit point berserker carries a shield

+2 for AC 5.

 

A large human sits on a tall stone chair
pathetically resembling a throne. He is
wrapped in a tattered, purple carpet, hav-
ing donned it like a robe. Four other men
kneel at his side.

 

 

 

The berserker on the throne considers himself
Derywinki III, Emperor of the Lower World.
He carries a long wooden staff and a shield
+2; he is quite mad. His voice booms com-
mandingly if he catches sight of the charac-
ters, even if they are simply walking past the
mouth of his cave: “Who seeks an audience
with Derywinki III? Kneel, peons!”

If the characters do not fall immediately to
their knees, the emperor flies into a rage:
“Impudent swine! You shall know the wrath
of the Emperor of the Lower World! Guards,
arrest them!” At this command, the four
kneeling berserkers, followed closely by the
emperor, rise and assault the party in full ber-
serk fury.

If the characters kneel before Derywinki, he
is mollified for the time being. He asks his
“subjects” if they are happy and healthy, and
why they seek an audience with his illustrious
self. Judge the characters’ response very care-
fully. Remember that the berserkers truly
believe they are the custodians of a mighty
underworld empire; they are sure to be
offended if the characters were to state that
the nearby owl bear is fomenting revolt, the
emperor and his berserker subjects would
march to slay the rebellious monster.

Behind the throne, a small wooden chest
contains the Empire’s treasury. The chest is
locked, and Derywinki lost the key years ago,
but the lock may be picked or the chest
smashed. A character can smash the chest
open by making a successful “open doors”
roll. The chest contains 12 pp, 45 gp, and 180
gP-


 

79. GELATINOUS JANITOR

This spot in the corridor is where the party
stumbles across the gelatinous cube. The crea-
ture is constantly on the move; when encoun-
tered, it is moving southwesterly, toward
cavern #80.

Gelatinous Cube (1): AC 8; HD 4*; hp 19;
MV 60'(20'); #AT 1; D 2-8 + paralysis;
Save F2; ML 12; AL N; surprise on 1-4.

If the cube surprises the party, it attacks a ran-
domly selected character in the front rank. If
the party is not surprised, figure combat and
damage normally.

While sweeping the dungeon, the gelati-
nous cube has picked up a few small treasures
it has not been able to dissolve. Once the crea-
ture is dead, characters can remove from
inside the creature: 12 gp and 47 sp.

80. WELL

This chamber contains a well of clear water.
Twelve feet deep, the well originates from a
small spring at its base. The water is drink-
able. No creatures live in this cavern.

81. SECOND OCTAGONAL
ROOM

 

This eight-sided room has eight identical
doors spaced evenly around the walls.

 

 

 

This room is identical in all respects to room
#70. When they first enter this room, the
characters probably think they are back to
room #70, and of course you shouldn’t try to
correct this misunderstanding!

82. PIT TRAP

At this spot in the corridor, trapdoors have been
placed above a pit, 10 feet deep. Unless the par-
ty is actively looking for traps, the first two char-
acters stepping onto the trapdoors trigger their
opening. Characters immediately behind the
first pair must successfully check their dexterity
or fall into the pit (they must roll their dexterity
score or less on a d20). Characters that fall take
1d6 points of damage.

83. STEAM VENT

This large cavern has one of the now-familiar
steam vents in the northeastern end. There is
10% chance per turn that this vent erupts
with the usual scalding burst of steam, pre-
ceded by one round of bubbling and hissing,

and doing 1d6 points of damage per round to
characters caught in the steam.

Residing in this chamber—reveling in the
occasional bursts of steam—are a lava lizard
and a swarm of steam weevils.

Steam Weevils (1 swarm): AC 7; HD 4; hp 14;
MV 60'(20'); #AT burn; D 1-4 points; Save
NM; ML 11; ALN.

Lava Lizard (1): AC 3; HD 4*; hp 16; MV 90’;
(30'); #AT 1 bite + burn; D 1-6/1-6; Save
F4; ML 12; ALN.

For a complete description of both these mon-

ster types, see New Monsters.

If the party enters the cavern, the steam wee-
vils immediately advance to swarm around a
single character. The lava lizard, however,
waits in the center of the cavern, moving to
attack only if the party advances to within 20
feet of it.

84. UNDERGROUND STREAM

 

A chute of rapids is about 100 feet on the
right. The rapids spill into a placid stream
before you, which meanders out of sight to
the left. Stretching 35 feet on both sides of

 

 

you is a dry shelf.

 



 

This stream is the only means of escape from
this level of the dungeon, other than climbing
back up the chute that spills into room #70.
The stream leads to dungeon level III.

If the characters stay on the shelf, there is
the normal chance to encounter a level III
wandering monster.

Greenish, phosphorescent lichens grow
along the walls bounding the stream, allowing
characters to see 100 feet away. If the party
tries to move upstream, the force of the rapids
is too strong; it knocks them back to their
starting spot within 1-3 rounds.

Moving downstream, however, is relatively
simple. Most of the stream is only one or two
feet deep; the bottom is smooth sand and fine
gravel. In a few places along the 500 feet lead-
ing to dungeon level III, halflings may have to
be lifted onto others’ shoulders, but there is
no danger of drowning or being washed
downstream.

Along the stream are five more dry shelves
where the party may elect to camp or rest. If
they do, they encounter no wandering mon-
sters. This area is one of the few places the
characters don’t have to worry about combat!


 

ADVENTURE IN
DUNGEON LEVEL III

This deepest and most deadly of the dungeon’s
levels also holds the key to the party's return to
the outside world. The characters have to bypass
many enemies to escape, however, not the least
of which is a young red dragon.

Level III comprises a series of winding tun-
nels and several large caverns. All these areas
were formed either by volcanoes or by the ero-
sive trickling of water through the ages; a few
elements of artificial origin were added to the
caverns—the steps leading to cavern #90, the
doors to room #99, for example—but by and
large, the forces of nature take credit for this
grim, foreboding haunt.

A dramatic geological fault line crosses the
dungeon level’s middle; elevation changes
suddenly along either side of the fault line;
the northern end of the level is generally 50
feet lower than the southern end. Characters
encounter this sudden shift in elevation at the
cliffs near caverns #94 and #95, and at the
rockslide near cavern #97.

Check for wandering monsters normally; if
an encounter is indicated, check Table 7 to see
the type of monster encountered.

TABLE 7

WANDERING MONSTERS
IN DUNGEON LEVEL Ill

Die Roll Creature Encountered

1 Lava Lizard (1): AC 3; HD 4*; hp
17; MV 90'(30'); #AT 1 bite/1
burn; D 1-6 all; Save F4; ML 12; AL

N.

2. Kobolds (2-12): AC 7; HD 1/2; hp
4,4,4, 3; 3, 3,2; 2,.2,1):1, 1; MV
60'(20'); #AT 1; D 1-4; Save NM;
ML 6; ALC.

3 Steam Weevils (1 swarm): AC 7; HD
4; hp 16; MV 60'(20'); #AT 1; D 1-
4; Save NM; ML 11; ALN.

4 Giant Bats (1-4): AC 6; HD 2; hp
13,10, 8,6; MV 180'(60'); #AT 1; D
1-4; Save Fl; ML 8; ALN.

5 Crab Spider (1): AC 7; HD 2*; hp
9; MV 120'(40'); #AT 1; D 1-8 +
poison; Save Fl; ML7; ALN.

6 Piranha Birds (2-12): AC 6; HD 1/
2; hp 4, 4, 4, 3, 3, 3, 2,.2,2,1,1,1;
MV 180’ (60’); #AT 1; D 1-4; Save
NM; ML 8; ALN.

Key to Areas in Dungeon Level III
85. LANDING

After traveling 400 feet downstream, the par-
ty sights this shelf of rock 100 feet ahead.

 

Illuminated by the greenish phosphores-
cent glow, a flat shore is visible about 100
feet ahead on the left. A small humanoid
figure stands on the shore.

 

 

 

Two more of these humanoids (kobolds) are
napping in an alcove.

Kobolds (3): AC 7; HD 1/2; hp 4,2,2; MV 60’
(20'); #AT 1; D 1-4; Save NM; ML6; ALC.

The kobolds are on guard duty, instructed to
report to their chief if they sight any creatures
coming down the stream. So many years have
passed since the kobolds have encountered
any intruders from this direction, however,
that the guards are not taking their duties very
seriously. When the characters first sight the
kobold, there is a 20% chance the little
humanoid sees them as well. If it doesn’t the
party may advance to 50 feet away, when there
is a 50% chance they are observed. If they are
still not seen, they can reach the northern
edge of the landing, but then are automati-
cally sighted. When they are, the lone kobold
shouts to his fellow guards asleep in the
alcove. Obviously, if any of these kobolds
escape, they run to warn the rest of the kobold
band. In this event, the party can hear the
blast of the warning horn from the south.

86. KOBOLD STORAGE ROOM
AND LAIR

As the characters reach the point where the
corridor to cavern #86 branches off, they see a
dull red light flickering ahead of them. This
light is a volcanic glow emanating from the
crevasse that splits room #87.

If no guards escaped from the landing (area
#85), the party hears a clashing of swords com-
ing from cavern #86. Four young kobold sol-
diers are practicing their swordsmanship
inside the cavern.

If one or more of the guards at the landing
did escape, the four kobolds are no longer in
cavern #86; instead they are waiting for the
party at the bridges to cavern #87, along with
other kobold soldiers.

Kobolds (4): AC 7; HD 1/2; hp 4, 4, 3, 2; MV

60'(20'); #AT 1; D 1-5 (1d6 — 1); Save NM;
ML 6; ALC.



If these kobolds are still in the cavern, they are
in the northern portion; in the southern
alcove are several shoddy wicker bins. The
bins contain fish and rat bodies, scaled or
skinned, presumably for use as food.

87. THE BRIDGES OF DEATH

This large chamber is split by a 20-foot wide
crevasse. The crevasse is 300 feet deep, and at
its bottom flows a river of molten lava. Obvi-
ously it’s “curtains” for any creature who falls
into it.

The south side of the crevasse is guarded by
five kobolds at all times. If any kobold the
party encountered on the landing (area #85)
or in cavern #86 had a chance to escape, an
alarm has been sounded; all the kobolds from
caverns #88 and #89, as well as any kobolds
escaping the landing or cavern #86, have
arrived to support the five kobold guards.

If no alarm has been given, the leader of the
five guards blows a brass horn he carries at his
side as soon as the intruders are sighted. Rein-
forcements arrive within three rounds.

Kobolds (5): AC 7; HD 1/2; hp 4, 3, 3, 2, 1;
MV 60'(20'); #AT 1 spear or shortsword; D
1-5; Save NM; ML 6; ALC.

Each of the five carries two spears.

The five kobold guards defend bridges A and
B by standing at the southern ends of the
bridges and throwing their spears at the char-
acters. The PCs cannot see bridge C until they
reach the edge of the crevasse. If a character
tries to cross it, one of the kobolds tires to
block the character by standing on the south-
ern end of the bridge.

Any character or kobold who is wounded
while on a bridge must check against dexterity
(roll his or her dexterity score or less on a d20);
if the check fails, the individual is knocked off
balance and falls into the chasm. For purposes
of this roll, all kobolds have a dexterity of 10.

If called by the horn, reinforcements from
room #86 approach the bridges from the
north. The reinforcements from cavern #88, if
called by the horn, reach the bridges from the
south. The reinforcements from room #89
reach the bridges through the secret doors
exiting at the southern end of bridge C. Note
that when the kobold chieftan arrives, the
morale of all of the kobolds is eight.


 

88. CHIEFTAN’S COUNCIL ROOM

In this chamber, the kobold chief and his
bodyguards dwell in modest splendor. If dis-
covered in the council room, the chief and his
six bodyguards are sitting in the center of the
room drinking a foul-smelling brew. More of
this nauseating liquid is fermenting in a large
kettle at the northern end of the room.
Kobold Chief (1): AC 7; HD 2; hp 9; MV 60’
(20'); #AT 1; D 2-7; Save F2; ML 12; ALC.
Kobold Bodyguards (6): AC7; HD 1 +1; hp 6
each; MV 60'(20'); #AT 1; D 1-5; Save F1;
ML 8 or 6; ALC.
The chief carries a shortsword +2.

Around the chief's waist is a belt made of gold
and silver coins linked by a chain. The belt is
worth 250 gp, but it constitutes all of the
monetary wealth owned by the entire tribe of
kobolds. If a character examines the liquid in
the kettle, it is identifiable as a kind of beer
made mainly from fishheads.

89. KOBOLD LAIR

Most of the kobold tribe occupies this room. If
they have not been called to the defense of the
bridges, 12 kobolds are here, languishing
about.

Kobolds (12): AC 7; HD 1/2; hp 4, 4, 4, 3, 3,
3, 2, 2, 2, 1, 1, 1; MV 60'(20'); #AT 1; D
1-4; Save NM; ML 6; ALC.

There are 15 dirty pallets of sand and dried
grass in the room, a few pieces of half-
consumed rat, and several bottles of the
fishhead beer. The room contains nothing of
value to the party.

90. EMPTY CORRIDOR

 

This short hallway branches off near the
top of a 50-foot high stairway. The floor is
littered with broken rock and other stony
rubble.

 

91. CHAMBER OF DARKNESS

 

Utter blackness consumes a 10-foot wide
stretch of the corridor wall. You can see
nothing but the darkness.

 

 

 

Many years ago, a very evil cleric met an
untimely end in this cavern and a strange
magical phenomena took place: the black
force of the evil cleric’s soul took possession of
the cavern, causing total darkness.

If the characters thrust a torch into the dark
area, the torch seems to disappear. But if they
withdraw it, it burns brightly. Only a light
spell can illuminate the room.

There is nothing dangerous or harmful in
the room, and in fact characters can find valu-
able treasure here. If they have no magical
light, however, they must explore the cham-
ber in darkness. For each character entering
the room, there is a 15% chance per turn a
character locates the skeleton of the dead cler-
ic and the backpack he carried. This chance is
cumulative, so if three characters search the
room, there is a 45% chance per turn one of
them discovers the corpse and backpack.

The backpack contains two rolled-up parch-
ments and three bottles of colored liquids.
The parchments are scrolls containing the fol-
lowing spells:

Clerical
First Level: cure light wounds (x2)
Second Level: bless

Magic-User
First Level: magic missile
Second Level: phantasmal force
Third Level: fireball

The bottles are magical potions. One bottle
holds two doses of potion of healing; another
holds two doses of potion of growth; and a
third holds two doses of potion of invisibility.

92. and 93. EMPTY CAVERNS

 

This network of rooms and tunnels has a
floor littered with broken rock and dust.
No tracks are visible.

 

 

 

94. and 95. KOBOLD-GUARDED
CLIFFS

These two corridors expand and then drop
away in 50-foot cliffs, and rock outcroppings
stud the walls. A single kobold is on guard at
the top of each cliff.

Kobolds (2): AC 7; HD 1/2; hp 3, 2; MV 60’
(20'); #AT 1; D 1-4; Save NM; ML6; ALC.

The kobolds are lying prone, watching the corri-
dors below them that approach from caverns #92
and #93. If the party sneaks up on them from
behind, add +2 to the kobolds’ chances of
being surprised. If the party is below the
kobolds, however, add +2 to the characters’
chance of being surprised, and allow NO chance
for the kobolds to be surprised.

If a thief tries to climb one of these cliffs,



the kobold on top waits until the thief is half-
way up, and then drops stones at him or her
(roll “to hit” normally). Each stone hitting its
mark does 1-4 (1d4) points of damage. The
thief must check against dexterity if struck. If
this roll fails, the thief falls. Consider his fall
to be from halfway up the cliff; give 1-6 (1d6)
points of damage for each 10 feet fallen.

Characters below may shoot arrows or other
missiles at the kobolds, but the kobolds have
an AC of 3 because the cliff shields them.

96. LARGE CAVERN

 

This large chamber contains many stalac-
tites and stalagmites, some of which are
broken and littering the floor.

 

97. ROCKSLIDE

 

The cliff here has gradually crumbled
away, leaving a jumble of huge boulders.
The rockslide lowers from south to north;
the bottom is 50 feet lower than the top.
The slope looks gentle enough to climb.

 

 

 

All characters may move both up and down
the rockslide, but calculate movement at one-
quarter the normal exploring rate. In addi-
tion, a hidden menace is coiled in the exact
center of the slide.

Giant Rattler (1): AC 5; HD 4*; hp 15; MV
120'(40'); #AT 2; D 1-4 + poison; Save
F2; ML 8; ALN.

The snake senses any character moving onto
the rockslide, and immediately begins to rat-
tle. The snake is hidden in the rocks, however,
so the party cannot see it. If the characters con-
tinue to move up or down the slide, the snake
slithers forward and tries to intercept the near-
est character. If the snake fails a morale check,
it disappears into the rocks, bothering the PCs
no more.

98. DEN OF THE LAVA LIZARDS

 

Two large, iguana-like lizards are in the
middle of this natural cavern. They are
perfectly still, and their eyes seem to be
closed.

 

 

 

These are lava lizards. They remain asleep
unless touched. Once something comes into
contact with one of them, however, they both
awaken and enter into combat on the next
round.


Lava Lizards (2): AC 3; HD 4*; hp 20,17; MV
90'(30'); #AT 1 bite/1 burn; D 1-6/1-6;
Save F4; ML 12; ALN.

For a complete description of the lava lizard,

see New Monsters.

Characters may walk around the lizards and
open a door at the rear of the cavern without
disturbing the creatures. Even loud noises do
not wake them.

99. OLD WARRIOR’S CAVERN

The door to this room is a sturdy slab of stone;
add +1 to a character's roll to open.

 

It is obvious this room has been inhabited,
presumably by the poor warrior whose
skeleton—still clad in plate mail armor—
rests on the room’s lone chair. A mighty
sword lies by the warrior’s side. Also visible

 

 

are a wooden table and a straw pallet bed.

 

These are the remains of a human warrior who
was trapped on this level years ago. On the
warrior's back is a quiver holding five arrows
+2. He wears plate mail + 1, and the sword at
his side is a sword + 1( +3 against dragons). A
broken longbow lies on the floor under the
table.

The secret door leading from his chamber
may be opened by rotating an outcrop of rock.

100. DRAGON’S ENTRY ROOM

The winding corridor leading to this cavern is
only three feet wide, so characters must travel
in single file. The dragon is too large to move
down this corridor.

 

This room is empty except for six small and
blackened skeletons on the floor.

 

 

 

A close examination reveals the skeletons
belonged to kobolds; any casual observer can
see they have been savagely burned.

101. LAIR OF THE RED DRAGON

The secret door on the far east side of this
cavern opens into the cavern by rotating an
outcropping of this rock. Characters entering
this cavern from the secret door enter directly
behind a red dragon, who is unaware of the
door's existence.

 

This chamber is huge and dark. You feel an
aura of evil, and from the darkness ahead,
you can hear deep, slow breathing.

 

 

 

The red dragon living in this cavern is quite
youthful by a dragon's standards, but it is still
an awesome and terrible opponent. Its lair is
connected to the outside by a tunnel nearly a
mile long.

Red Dragon (1): AC —1; HD 7; hp 22; MV
90' (30'); #AT 2 claws/1 bite/ + breathes
fire; D 1-8/1-8/4-32 + 22; Save F7; ML
10; ALC.

Spells:

First Level: ventriloquism, charm person,
detect magic.
Second Level: detect invisible, continual
light.
Third Level: dispel magic

There is a 10% chance the dragon is asleep
when discovered. If the characters encounter
the dragon, then escape and stay away for at
least six turns, there is a 10% chance again the
dragon will be asleep when they return.

If some characters invisibly enter the room,
the dragon is aware of their presence due to its
keen hearing, unless the character is a thief
who successfully rolls to ‘‘move silently.” If the
dragon is aware of even one invisible charac-
ter, it casts its detect invisibile spell. The
dragon is then able to see any invisible indi-
viduals or objects in the room. As long as the
party is not fighting the dragon, it is satisfied,
however, merely to keep tabs on those who are
supposedly invisible.

When the crafty serpent first becomes
aware of the PCs, it does not immediately
bake them with its fiery breath. Rather, it uses
its ventriloquism spell to create a sound of
great roaring and bellowing behind the party.
When it is convinced that all the party mem-
bers are in the room, it chuckles deeply before
greeting them with the utmost politeness. It
enjoys conversational banter and since it sure-
ly doesn’t feel threatened by the presence of a
band of mere humans, it may spend 2-12
(2d6) turns chit-chatting with the PCs.

The serpent is sitting upon a large collec-
tion of coins and other valuable items. It will
react very favorably to compliments and flat-
tery, and will even allow characters to advance
and examine the many treasures in its trove if
the group is appropriately respectful.

The dragon attacks if the characters try to
leave the cavern, or if the party moves to
attack the dragon. In both cases, roll for initia-
tive normally; note that the dragon always
uses its breath weapon as its first attack.

If the characters do not attack the dragon
and do not attempt to leave the room, be
aware of when the dragon grows weary of con-
versation (2-12 turns): its comments should be



more curt and impolite, even hostile. If the
characters still do not attack within two
rounds, the dragon attacks anyway.

On the first round, the dragon tries to hit
the greatest number of characters with its
breath weapon; after that the dragon attacks
as explained in the Basic Rules (roll a 1d6; a
one, two, or three means the dragon uses its
claw and bite attacks; a four, five, or six means
it uses its breath again).

If the players are able to kill or subdue the
dragon, they find as much treasure as they can
carry. The pile beneath the dragon includes
7,000 cp, 10,000 sp, 5,000 ep, 2,000 gp, 800
pp, and assorted gems (500 gp x20), and jew-
elry (1,000 gp, 750 gp, 600 gp, and 500 gp
x2). Also buried among the coins are a ring of
Protection +1, a wand of magic detection
(eight charges), a rod of cancellation, and a
bag of devouring.

The tunnel exiting the dragon's lair climbs
gradually for a mile until it exits north of the
ruined monastery.

TYING UP THE LOOSE ENDS

Since the party has arranged its return trip,
they should have no particular problem get-
ting back to Guido’s Fort—unless, of course,
they happen to be accompanied by a subdued
red dragon!

The dragon is clearly too large and heavy to
put into a fishing boat. If the party tries to do
so, the boat sinks. Another smoke signal
might bring another fishing boat, or the party
could build a raft.

Seeing the boat is too small, the PCs might
try to coax the dragon into swimming along-
side the boat, which the dragon does, though
clumsily.

If the party needed the mage during the
adventure, he will seek them out and claim his
price. His choices are, in order: a subdued
dragon, the rod of cancellation, any ring, any
wand, any +2 item.

If the characters are wondering what to do
with a subdued dragon, they can find a mage
at the Lion’s Den who offers to buy the
dragon. He offers 5,000 gp but the PCs can
bargain for up to 10,000 gp, the mage’s final
offer. It is recommended the dragon pass from
the campaign but if you choose to let them
keep it, the dragon will refuse to go adventur-
ing and should remain, in a campaign con-
text, a source of prestige for which the
characters pay heavily.


 

 

Design: Tracy and Laura Hickman
Development: Jon Pickens and Edward Sollers
Development & Editing: Curtis Smith
Graphic Design: Ruth Hoyer

Cover Art: Jeff Easely

Interior Art: Jeff Easely and Tim Truman
Cartography: Diesel & D.C. Sutherland III

General Notes: This module was originally
published as the first and second modules in
the RPGA™ series, which were available only
to members of that organization as RPGA 1
and RPGA 2. They were re-edited and com-
bined into a single adventure by Curtis Smith,
appearing as B7, Rahasia. The adventure
appears here in its entirety in its later form.

 

New Magical Items ............002005 96
Maps 146-149
Monster Tables .......... inside back cover
Player Handouts ................ 159-160

 

Adventure background

Deep in a lush, enchanted forest lies a pleas-
ant elven village. For years, the whole village
prospered. The people lived from the forest
around their mountain village and temple.

Four weeks ago, an evil human cleric,
known only as “the Rahib,” broke into the
temple. He was looking for a treasure—a
young maiden’s dowry, rumored to be in the
temple. Instead, he discovered a secret cavern
under the temple. The cavern contains the
ruins of an ancient wizard’s tower.

While exploring the ruins, the Rahib dis-
covered three witches whose spirits’ were
trapped in statues. The witches, Karelena,
Solorena, and Trilena, convinced the Rahib to
help them escape. To escape, each witch must
take over a maiden’s body, trapping the maid-
en's spirit in the statue where the witch was.

Using the witches’ knowledge, the Rahib
magically charmed and enslaved the Siswa—
the elven students and teachers who lived in
the temple. Two nights ago, the Rahib and the
charmed elves sneaked into the village and
kidnapped two elven maidens, Sylva and
Merisa. The Rahib freed Karelena and
Solerena, trapping Sylva and Merisa’s spirits.
The Rahib has only to kidnap Rahasia, the
most beautiful elven maiden, to free the last
witch, Trilena.

When they are all free and together, the three
witches are each much more powerful than when
alone. So, until Trilena is freed, Karelena and
Solorena will not leave the tower ruins.

While delivering a package to the village,
the PCs find a message and meet Rahasia, the
most beautiful elven maiden. Her father and
her betrothed both went to the temple, but
never returned.

The PCs must go to the temple and find
Rahasia’s father and betrothed. Then they
must find the cavern, release the imprisoned
elven maidens and destroy the Rahib and the
witches.

DM Notes

The Siswa (elven students and teachers) who
were charmed by the Rahib are not really
responsible for their actions because they are
magically controlled. Encourage your players
to think of ways to get around the Siswa with-
out killing them. The charm keeps them in a
dream-like state, but it is possible to talk to
them. The charm also changes their align-
ment to chaotic. When the Rahib and the
witches are destroyed, the Siswa change back
to normal. Until then, however, they follow
the Rahib’s orders.

ae

When the PCs encounter the witches,
remind the players that the witches are using
the bodies of elven maidens. Encourage the
players to think of ways of capturing and
defeating the witches without inflicting physi-
cal damage. If the PCs capture a Siswa or
witch, give the PCs the appropriate experience
points. If they kill a Siswa or witch, subtract
the experience points from the PCs!

To capture, rather than kill, a Siswa or
witch, the players must say they are trying to
capture their opponent. Then, count all dam-
age toward unconsciousness, rather than
death. NPCs fall unconscious when their hit
points reach zero. PCs should usually have
enough time to tie up unconscious enemies
before they wake up. PCs cannot capture non-
living opponents and creatures such as the
water weird (see New Monsters).

Certain areas in the temple and tower con-
tain magical portals. The portals magically
connect two places. Some portals only send,
others only receive. When characters pass
through a sending portal they instantly appear
at its receiving portal. Characters cannot tell
when they pass through a portal, unless they
realize they are not where they expected to be.
Once characters go through a portal, they can-
not come back the same way. Objects put part-
way into sending portals cannot be
withdrawn; they must go all the way through.

The player characters can use the elven vil-
lage as a base during the adventure. Empha-
size that the elves are taking a great risk in
hiding the characters between adventures.
The amount of equipment the characters can
get between adventures is limited to what a
woodland community can provide. There are
no local high level NPCs for training or heal-
ing, although limited numbers of healing
potions can be made available if needed.

Starting the Adventure

The player characters have turned off the Duke's
Road, following Sindar’s directions, when they
notice the woods around them is somehow dif-
ferent. Elves will immediately recognize that this
is an elven wood. At some point in their passage,
stop giving general descriptions and begin with
the first boxed description.

THE FOREST

 

The beautiful elven forest sleeps peacefully
about you. Leafy green trees with silver
and white trunks stand in blissful grandeur
as far as you can see. The trail you walk

 

 

 


 

 

winds toward the high mountains nearby
to the north. The forest's carpet of ferns
and deep green bushes is punctuated by
the bright reds, blues, and yellows of the
abundant woodland flowers.

Ahead, sunlight flashes off metal lying
in the path. Armor—elven armor—and
whoever wears it is not moving.

 

 

 

The elf on the trail died not long ago, perhaps
slain by bandits. His armor is crumpled and
useless. A search of the body reveals only a
piece of parchment bearing a message in both
Common Tongue and Elvish.

Up the mountain path lies the elven vil-
lage. Beyond, a mountain of gray stone
thrusts up from the sweet meadow grasses.

Let the players read Rahasia’s letter on the
pull-out page at the end of the book.

THE ELVEN VILLAGE

 

In the village, the delicate elven dwellings
mirror the grace of their people. Yet the
faces of the villagers reveal great sadness.
You soon are lead to an elven maid, whose
veiled grace and beauty outshines all oth-
ers present as the sun outshines the stars—
she is Rahasia.
“Will you aid me?” she asks.

 

 

 

If the characters accept, the elves will provide
food and shelter, but no other aid, though
they will hide badly wounded characters from
the Siswa while they heal. The elves cannot
tell the PCs very much about the temple
because all the elves who are familiar with the
temple are under the Rahib’s control. The
elves do know, however, that the temple was
protected by a powerful guardian before the
Rahib came. They think that the Rahib must
have destroyed the guardian. They also show
the PCs sketches of the kidnapped maidens,
Sylva and Merisa. Rahasia accompanies the
characters to the roadside shrine on their way
to the temple.

If the PCs refuse to help Rahasia and the
other elves, they are politely, but firmly, sent
on their way—they are not wanted and their
presence could bring down the wrath of the
Rahib. In the woods beyond the village, the
PCs are ambushed by a large group of Siswa
led by the Rahib. The PCs are showered with
vials of sleeping gas with no chance to make
saving throws. The PCs are taken to the tem-
ple and locked in cells f, g, and h in area 49.
The PCs wake up in those cells and must
escape from there.

ADVENTURE IN THE TEMPLE OF GRAY MOUNTAIN

 

Many years ago, friendly dwarves helped the
elves built most of the temple in return for
protection and aid from the elves and Elyas.
The upper level chambers are natural caverns
where the elves worshipped. The passages
were carved out by the dwarves.

Since the arrival of the Rahib, the Siswa
rarely visit the upper level of the temple. The
entire upper level is unlit and unused. Thick
dust covers most things and cobwebs are com-
mon throughout. The Siswa use the stairways
in the courtyard shrines to reach the lower
levels.

If captured Siswa are questioned about the
temple, they only explain how they used to
use the temple, saying:

 

“When we come to the temple, we climb
the steps to the temple doors (14). Passing
through the doors, we turn to the right and
stop in a small room (15) to put on robes of
worship. Then we walk down the hallway
through a large cavern (16). Next, we
move along another hallway (17) past sev-
eral small rooms. We then go through a
magical passage (18/32) to another hall-
way. From there, we enter the main temple
(35), where we worship. When we finish,
we leave the main temple (35) and go
down a hallway, through a magical portal
(33/21) to another hallway (22) that is
strewn with flower petals. That hallway
opens into the temple of the Siswa. The
Well of Punishment is in that room. After
returning our robes we leave the temple.”

 

 

 

GETTING TO THE TEMPLE

A trail leads from the elven village into the
mountains. Before the PCs leave the village,
the elves give them a map of the area (Map 1)
and warn them of wandering bands of Siswa
who attack and slay outsiders. The PCs do not
encounter anyone on the way to the temple,
but you should roll a few false encounter
checks to keep the players guessing. About
halfway to the temple, the PCs come upon the

roadside shrine.

THE ROADSIDE SHRINE
Use Map 1 for the Roadside Shrine.



 

A small roadside shrine sits near the path
to the temple.

 

 

 

Rahasia stops here to offer incense. The
shrine’s entrance is in the center of the west
wall, and the main room is 15 feet square. In
the north and south walls are 10-foot-by-10-
foot alcoves.

Before the northern alcove is a small statue
of a strong-looking man with a long beard, sit-
ting upon an altar with his legs crossed. Raha-
sia tells the PCs that the man was, Elayas, a
mage of great power, the founder of the Quiet
Way and the spiritual leader of the Siswa. He
disappeared in a horrible battle with three
witches who attacked his tower-home many,
many years ago. If the PCs try to investigate
the statue or the alcove behind it, Rahasia tells
them that they must not disgrace the Old One
by walking past his gaze. (This custom pre-
vents outsiders from entering the temple
unannounced, but this reason is long forgot-
ten.)

The northern alcove is a magic portal that
teleports anyone entering it to area 41 on the
lower level of the temple. The southern alcove
is a receiving portal from the same area.

Courtyard and Upper Temple Level
Use Map 2 for areas 1-24.

In the courtyard and upper level, check for
random encounters every third game turn.
Roll 1d6. A result of 6 means the PCs
encounter something. When an encounter
occurs, roll 1d12 and use the resulting
encounter on Table 1 (inside back cover).

1, OUTSIDE THE TEMPLE

 

The gates of the temple are silver double
doors that are 30 feet wide overall. They
are ornately carved with forest scenes, and
stand silently shut. The outer walls of the
temple are vine-covered stone, and about
20 feet high. At the corners of the south
wall, delicate domes rise 10 feet above the
walls.

 

 

 

The gates can be opened as normal doors.
There are no guards. Rahasia will not enter the
courtyard. She tells the PCs she will hide in
the brush nearby, waiting for their return.


 

2. COURTYARD

12. SOUTHWEST SHRINE

15. CLOAK ROOM

 

The double doors open into a courtyard
that is 80 feet deep and 90 feet wide. Once
well cared for, the dirt floor is now choked
with weeds. In the center of the yard sits a
large pool. Just beyond the pool is a set of
stairs leading to the main doors of the tem-
ple itself. Four wooden sheds are attached
to the west wall, and another four to the
cast wall. In the southern corners of the
courtyard are two small octagonal stone
buildings, each covered by a delicate-
looking dome. The buildings are about 30
feet wide.

 

3-10. SMALL SHEDS

 

The shed is a 10-foot-by-20-foot area with
a dirt floor and thatched roof. The shed’s
rear wall is formed by the courtyard wall.
The shed’s walls are made of woven reeds

 

 

on a wooden framework.

 

All of the sheds are empty, except number 7.
It contains two leather sacks marked with the
word “‘Tithe’’ in Common Tongue and
embossed with two small black panthers. Each
sack contains 250 cp.

11. COURTYARD POOL

 

The pool is 40 feet long and 30 feet across.
Its stone rim rises three feet above the
ground. The water within has gone brack-
ish and putrid, looking almost glossy
black.

 

 

This is an octagonal room, 30 feet in diam-
eter. The floor is dirt; the walls and domed
ceiling are made of stone. A 2-foot-high
platform covers the far half of the room. A
set of stairs leads downward on each side of
the platform. In the center of the platform
rests a statue of a man sitting with his legs
crossed. He appears very strong and has a

 

 

long beard. The statue is 15 feet tall.

 

This shrine is empty. The stairs lead to area 25
on middle level.

13. SOUTHEAST SHRINE

Use the boxed description of area 12. This
shrine is the same as area 12 except that these
stairs lead to area 26, and a hungry gargoyle is
hiding behind the statue in this shrine. The
gargoyle springs out and attacks when the
characters enter the shrine. The gargoyle will
not chase the characters if it is thrown food, or
has an unfortunate adventurer to munch on!

Gargoyle: AC 5; HD 4**; hp 16; MV 90'/ 150’
(30'/50'); #AT 4; D 1d3/1d3/1d6/1d4;
Save F8; ML 11; AL C; XP 125; can be hit
only by magical weapons

Scattered on the platform behind the statue
are 80 gp, 4,000 sp, and the remains of some
half-chewed leather sacks. A careful search
reveals a scrap of leather with two black pan-
thers embossed on it.

14, UPPER TEMPLE ENTRY WAY

 

A water weird (see New Monsters) lives in the
pool, It attacks any living creature that dis-
turbs the water. It ignores objects that are
thrown into the water, though.

Water Weird: AC 5; HD 3; hp 12; MV 60’
(20'); #AT 1; D 1 + drowning; Save F6;
ML 12; AL C; XP 35

The water weird is guarding two large jars at
the bottom of the pool. Each jar contains 150
cp, 350 sp, and 200 gp. Buried in the murky
filth at the bottom of the pool are 6 gems,
worth 100 gp each. Characters have a 2 in 6
chance of finding one gem in the black scum
each turn they search. Characters may search
as long as they like. Characters who splash
about in the water for more than three turns
attract a wandering monster from Table 1.

Beyond the double doors is a 10-foot-long
entryway. A large, ornate compass rose is
carved into the center of the floor. The
entryway leads to an arched hallway run-
ning east and west. The hallway is 10 feet
wide and a total of 50 feet long. At each
end, the hallway opens into a large cham-
ber. On the north wall, immediately across
from the entryway, is the faint drawing of a
hand pointing east. Two curtained-off
doorways lead from the south wall of the
hallway. One doorway is just west of the
entryway; the other is east of the entryway.

 

 

This chamber is 10 feet wide by 20 feet
long. In the southeast corner of the room
are two large brass coffers. Atop each is a
large, lit candle. Dozens of small pegs line
the walls at about shoulder height.

 

 

 

Each coffer contains 550 cp and 50 sp. The
coffers are not locked or trapped. Behind the
coffers is a pile of dirty rags—the worthless
remains of the Siswa’s village clothing.

The Siswa continue to light candles daily in
this room. Their robes have not been brought
back since the last ceremony. Some old robes
are in area 16.

16. TEMPLE OF THE INITIATES

 

This is a roughly diamond-shaped cavern,
covered with dust. Archways in the north
and west corners lead to 10-foot-wide
arched hallways. Footprints in the dust
lead from the west archway out through
the north archway. Overhead, the ceiling
opens into a great dome filled with stalac-
tites. A broad platform juts from the
southeast wall into the center of the room.
On the platform is a statue of a man with a
long beard, who sits with his legs crossed.
A small altar stands before the statue. A
dusty pile of folded cloth lies before the
altar.

 

 

 

The pile of cloth is actually ten temple robes,
old, but neatly folded. The robes are long and
brown, with deep hoods and sleeves. Usually,
a character of roughly elven build who wears
the robes has an 80% chance to fool any Siswa
he meets into thinking that he, too, is a Siswa.
Other creatures in the temple are fooled and
do not attack 60% of the time. Adjust the
chance of fooling by characters’ sizes and
actions. In general, check only once each
encounter—using the worst chance for the
group—unless the situation requires addi-
tional checks. Remember that the Siswa only
speak Elvish.

17. HALL OF THE WORLDLY
WALK

 

The hallway is empty. The hand directs the
Siswa on a counter-clockwise circle of the tem-
ple.



 

This 10-foot-wide arched hallway runs into
the darkness. Several 10-foot-wide dark
rooms branch off both sides of the hallway.

 

 

 

The rooms are empty, except for dust and cob-
webs.


 

18. HALL JUNCTION

There are magical portals in areas 18, 21, 31,
32, 33, and 34. The portals are marked on the
maps with a T (for Teleporter) or an R (for tele-
port Receiver). When the PCs pass through
these portals, they are turned to face a new
direction, without knowing it. Unless they see
one of the compass roses in the temple (in area
14, 29, and 35), they do not know the true
compass directions. When they do not know
the true compass directions, describe what
they see by using their (faulty) compass direc-
tions of, more simply, by using “‘left,”
“right,” “ahead,” and “behind.”

If the PCs have not passed through one of
the portals, use the following boxed descrip-
tion as it is.

 

Two hallways meet here. Several shadowy
figures and flickering lights are moving
around far to the north.

 

 

 

Area 19 is west of this intersection. Area 17 is
to the south. The hallways to the north and
east are not true halls, they are magical por-
tals. Area 21 also contains portals like these.

The north portal teleports anyone entering
it to area 32 on the middle level. The east por-
tal sends anyone entering it to area 34 on the
same level. These portals are one-way only
(down). Characters who move through one
cannot return; they find only a cold stone wall
behind them.

However, light passes through the portals in
the opposite direction (from 32 to 18 and
from 34 to 18). The light makes the portal
look like a very long hallway. Sound does not
pass through the portals in any direction.
Thus, a character who goes through can be
seen by characters on the other side, but can-
not be heard.

The shadowy figures and flickering lights
are the PCs themselves! The arrangement of
the portals allows the PCs to see themselves
280 feet away. Their image goes from 18 to 21
to 31 to 32 back to 18. At such a distance it is
impossible to make out details, of course.

19. REAR HALL

 

This 10-foot-wide arched hallway is filled
with cobwebs. It runs into the distant
darkness.

 

 

 

Aside from a single curtained opening in the
center of the north wall, this hallway is empty.

20. STORAGE ROOM

 

A long room, 10 feet wide and 30 feet
long, lies on each side of the opening
behind the curtain. In the room to the left,
under the light of burning torches in wall
sconces, five brown-robed figures crouch
in a circle. They mutter among themselves
as they sharpen wicked-looking blades in
the flickering light.

 

 

 

The figures are Siswa, and they are huddled
around two leather sacks. They do not notice
the party unless disturbed. Each sack contains
150 gp. Embossed on the outside of these
sacks are two black panthers and the word
“Tithe” in Common Tongue.

Siswa (5): AC 8; E1; hp 3, 1, 4, 6, 4; MV 120’
(40'); #AT 1; D 1d8; Save E1; ML 8; ALC;
XP 13

21. HALL JUNCTION

There is a magical portal here. The magical
portals are explained in the text for area 18.

If the PCs have not passed through one of
the portals, use the following boxed descrip-
tion as it is.

 

Hallways run south and east from this
junction. West and north of this junction
lie two 10-foot-wide hallways filled with
dark shadows. The hallways end in stone
walls 20 feet away.

 

 

 

As the party enters the junction, four human
bandits run out of the north wall and attack!
The bandits come through the portal at area
33. The bandits are not surprised. The PCs are
surprised on a roll of 1 or 2 on 146, If the PCs
are surprised, the bandits make one free
attack. Then roll for initiative for the first
round of normal combat.

After their first attack, the bandit leader
yells, “They aren’t Siswa!"’ The other bandits
look confused. Immediately get the PCs’ reac-
tions. The bandits stop fighting unless PCs
attack them. If the Siswa in area 20 are still
active, they run out toward the noise and
probably attack. If they do, the bandits join
the PCs against the Siswa. The bandit leader's
name is Teikus.

Bandits (4): AC 6; T1 (leader is T3); hp 8, 4,

3, 3; MV 90’ (30’); #AT 1; D 1d6; Save T1
(leader saves as T3); ML 8; ALC; XP 10

These bandits are wearing leather armor and
are armed with short swords.

The bandits are totally lost. They came into
the temple to steal and went down the south-
eastern shrine stairs. They were seen and pur-
sued, so they started running down halls at
random trying to get out. They picked up five
leather sacks along the way and will gladly
hand some over in exchange for directions
out. Fifty ep are in each sack. The sacks are
marked with two black panthers and the word
“Tithe.”

Their encounter with the party is a com-
plete accident, so you should role-play their
efforts to get out (with some treasure) to the
hilt.

22. HALL OF THE TRUTHFUL
WAY

 

A 10-foot-wide arched hallway runs into
the darkness ahead. Off both sides of the
hall are arched openings into several small
rooms. Dust covers the hallway and old
flower petals, now brown and dry, crackle
underfoot.

 

 

 

The flower petals were strewn by Siswa before
the Rahib arrived. In each alcove is a stone
statue of a philosopher or sage of the Siswa.
There is nothing of value in any of the rooms
except room 22e.

A statue of an elven sage stands in room
22e. Around the neck of the stone statue is a
golden pendant with a black jade stone. It is
worth 1,300 gp. Rahasia’s father carried the
pendant with him to the temple. After help-
ing Ular-Taman in area 42, he was seen by the
Siswa and hid in this dead-end room. Realiz-
ing he would soon be captured, he placed the
pendant upon the statue and called on the
spirit of the sage to protect it. He was cap-
tured, but the Siswa could not remove the
pendant. Rahasia’s father was taken to the
‘Well of Punishment and thrown down to the
third level. The pendant has rested here
undisturbed since then.

Anyone not of lawful alignment who tries
to take the pendant while it is on the statue is
hit by a blue bolt of electricity from the statue.
The bolt inflicts 1d8 points of damage to the
offending character (who does not get the
pendant).

Lawful characters can examine the pendant
on the statue. The pendant is part of a talis-
man of power, described in the Appendix
under New Magical Items.


 

The only way to remove the pendant is to
insert the proper ring into the indentation in
the pendant. The ring is hidden in area 42.
After the pendant is removed from the statue,
any character may handle it safely.

23. TEMPLE OF THE SISWA

 

This is a roughly diamond-shaped cavern,
covered with dust. Archways in the north
and east corners lead to 10-foot-wide
arched hallways. Footprints in the dust
lead from the north archway out through
the east archway. Overhead, the ceiling
opens into a great dome filled with stalac-
tites. The cavern’s walls are covered with
fresco paintings of the natural beauties of
the world. The frescoes are somewhat fad-
ed and look long uncared for. A broad
platform juts from the southwest wall into
the center of the room. A 15-foot-tall
statue of a strong man with a long beard
sits on the platform with his legs crossed.
There is some sort of altar in front of the
statue’s knees.

 

 

 

The cast archway leads to area 14 (the entryway).
The north archway leads to area 22. The altar is
actually the 4-foot-wide mouth of the Well of
Punishment, whose 10-foot-diameter shaft
drops down into darkness. The shaft drops 50
feet to area 48 on lower level. Its damp walls are
too slippery for even a thief to climb.

24, CLOAK ROOM

Spells:

First Level: magic missile, shield
Alki is wearing chainmail and is armed with a
sword, a bow, and carries a shield.

Middle Temple Level
Use Map 3 for areas 25-35.

In the middle level, check for random
encounters every third game turn. Roll 1d6. A
result of 6 means the PCs encounter some-
thing. When an encounter occurs, roll 1d8
and use the resulting encounter on Table 1.
Do not use encounters 9-12.

Directly below the courtyard, on the mid-
dle level, are living quarters of the Siswa
priests. The personal cells of the priests circle a
central dining hall. The stonework in this area
is all dwarven. The floor-stones are worn
smooth and the ceiling is damp. The Great
Temple (area 35), however, is a natural cavern
within the gray stone itself. It is surrounded
by hallways (some are magical) that were cut
around the central cavern.

25-26. STAIRS

These two stairways look identical. The stair-
way at 25 splits into two sets of stairs that rise
to the southwest shrine, area 12 on the upper
level. The stairway in area 26 connects with
the southeast shrine, area 13 on the upper
level.

27. PRIESTHOOD CELLS

 

Thick dust covers everything in this room.
Dozens of pegs line the walls at shoulder
height. Suddenly, a slender figure hurtles
from the darkness, shouting a warrior’s
challenge.

 

 

 

An elven warrior-seer, Alki, hid here when he
heard the PCs coming. Unless the PCs try to
talk to him, Alki will fight to the death.

Alki was one of the original elves summon-
ed to help Rahasia, but he arrived at the tem-
ple after the others. He already has used his
two spells. He will gladly join the PCs if
invited. Alki is devoted to beauty, and thus to
Rahasia.

Alki, Elven Warrior-Seer: AC 4; E2; hp 12;
MV 60’ (20’); #AT 1 at +2; D 1d8 +2;
Save E2; ML9; ALL; XP 20; Str 16, Int 12,
Wis 8, Dex 9, Con 13, Cha 12

There are seven openings on one side of
this 10-foot-wide hallway. The openings
are blocked by heavy curtains.

 

 

 

Each cell contains a cot of woven reeds, several
dirty rags, and a pile of stones. None of these
items have any value. There is nothing else in
any of the cells, except cells 27f, 27g, 27n, and
270, listed below.

27£. PRIESTHOOD CELL

 

Within this cell is a woven reed cot with a
chest under it, several rags, and a pile of

 

 

stones.

 

Darts smeared with sleeping ointment spring
from the chest the moment the lid is lifted.
Any character who is in the way must make a
saving throw vs. poison or fall asleep for 1d6
turns.



Within the chest are 200 sp, 150 ep, a bot-
tle and a half of fine wine and a pair of smooth
stones.

27g. PRIESTHOOD CELL

 

A flickering light comes from this cell.
Three brown-robed figures huddle around
a candle on the floor. They sway back and
forth as they repeat a chant that makes no
sense to you.

 

 

 

Three Siswa are chanting here. They become
most unreasonable if their chanting is dis-
turbed. They attack outsiders.

Each character who attempts to pass this cell
without being noticed has a base 65% chance
of doing so. Thieves may add their move
silently ability to this base chance if they state
they are doing so. If any character fails, the
Siswa notice immediately.

Siswa (3): AC 8; E1; hp 4, 3, 2; MV 120’ (40’);
#AT 1; D 1d8; Save E1; ML8; ALC; XP 13

27n. DARK CELL

 

In the back of this darkened cell, five fig-
ures rest upon the floor.

 

 

 

The five Siswa in this room heard the PCs
approaching and are only pretending to be
asleep. The Siswa don’t know who they hear,
but they attack at once if they discover anyone
in the temple outside their brotherhood.

Siswa (5): AC 8; E1; hp 6, 6, 5, 3, 2; MV 120’

(40'); #AT 1; D 1d8; Save E1; ML 8; ALC;
XP 13

270. DARK CELL

 

In the back of this dark cell lie five robed
figures.

 

 

 

These Siswa are asleep. Each character
attempting to pass this cell must roll his dex-
terity or less on 1d20 or awaken these Siswa.
These Siswa also awaken if a fight occurs in the
next room, cell 27n.

Siswa (5): AC 8; El; hp 6, 6, 5, 4, 3; MV 120’
(40’); #AT 1; D 1d8; Save E1; ML 8; ALC;
XP 13


 

28. HALL OF THE SISWA

 

This room is 30 feet wide north to south,
and 50 feet long east to west. Double doors
stand in the center of the north and south
walls. Smoking torches dimly illuminate
the rows of dark, stained tables and bench-
es that fill the room. Half-woven baskets
stand on two of the tables. Two 10-foot-
square alcoves are cut into the centers of
the east and west walls. Over the western
alcove is carved the word ““KESINI,” while
over the eastern alcove is carved the word
“KESANA.”

 

 

 

The alcoves are magical portals. Unlike the
portals in the upper level, light cannot pass
through these portals, nor do they look like
halls. The east alcove (KESANA) only sends;
it teleports anything in it to a garbage-filled
marsh north of the temple. Anyone entering
the east alcove materializes 15 feet above the
garbage and falls into the swampy mess.
There are no difficulties getting back to the
elven village from the swamp.

The west alcove (KESINI) only receives
things from the southern alcove in area 41.
Entering it has no effect. The Siswa receive
their food from the western alcove (KESINI).
After eating, they throw their scraps into the
eastern alcove (KESANA) where their magical
disposal system removes the trash.

29. SISWA GUARDS

 

Flickering torches light this area. Ahead,
beyond openings to the east and west, is a
pair of double doors. An ornate compass
rose is carved into the floor in front of the
doors. At the openings, two brown-robed
figures step out to bar your way. Both

 

 

silently raise gleaming curved blades.

 

The north doors lead to area 30; the south
doors lead to area 27. These Siswa guards may
not attack immediately, but they do attack
anyone they believe are not Siswa. They will
fight to the death (or capture).

Siswa Guards (2): AC 4; E2; hp 8, 9; MV 120’
(40’); #AT 1; D 1d8; Save E2; ML 10; AL
C; XP 20

30. HALLWAYS OF THE GREAT
TEMPLE
There are magical portals at the ends of these

halls. The portals are explained in the text for
area 18.

These four halls encircle the Great Temple. A
gelatinous cube, brought here by Karelena
and Solorena, guards these halls. It moves
about constantly, cleaning the halls and pro-
tecting the Rahib’s stronghold from unwant-
ed guests. The cube attacks anyone in the
halls, but it never leaves area 30.

To determine where the cube is when the
PCs first enter these halls, roll 1d4 on Table 2,
below. Every turn the PCs stay in these halls,
roll any die once. An even roll moves the cube
one hallway clockwise. An odd roll moves the
cube one hallway counterclockwise.

TABLE 2
GELATINOUS CUBE LOCATION

Die Roll Location

North Hall
South Hall
East Hall
West Hall

Bene

Gelatinous Cube: AC 8; HD 4*; hp 17; MV
60’ (20'); #AT 1; D 2d4 + paralyze; Save
F2; ML 12; ALN; XP 125

31. NORTHWEST JUNCTION

The hallway to the north appears to continue
into the darkness, but it is really a magical
portal to area 21 on the upper level.

32. SOUTHWEST JUNCTION

The short hallway to the south is a receiving
portal from the north portal in area 18, on the
upper level.

33. NORTHEAST JUNCTION

The hallway to the north appears to continue
into the darkness, but it is really a magical
portal to area 21 on the upper level.

34. SOUTHEAST JUNCTION

The short hallway to the south is a receiving
portal from the east portal in area 18, on the
upper level.

35. THE GREAT TEMPLE

 

Strong wooden double doors, ornately
carved with forest scenes, open into a huge
natural cavern. The cavern is eight-sided
and 70 feet across. It is brightly lit by oil
lamps on the walls. The walls rise 30 feet,

 

 

 



 

then open into a great 40-foot-high metal
dome. A large compass rose is carved into
the floor in the center of the room. There
are three doorways; one in the center of the
west wall, one in the center of the east wall,
and one in the center of the south wall. A
raised platform juts 30 feet out from the
north wall. At the back of the platform sits
a 15-foot-tall clay statue of the strong man
with the long beard. At the front of the
platform is an altar. A black-robed figure
stands behind the altar, burning incense.

 

 

 

The figure behind the the altar is the Rahib.
At the first sign of intruders, the Rahib throws
his arms in the air and disappears in a flash of
smoke and flame. He actually drops through a
trap door behind the altar that leads to area 36
on the lower level. There is no way the PCs can
prevent his escape at this time.

The statue is a huge, clay-covered bone
golem. See New Monsters for details about
this creature. As soon as anyone not wearing a
Siswa robe comes within 20 feet of it, attacks
it, or does any damage to the altar area, the
golem attacks. The golem’s dried mud cover-
ing cracks and falls away, revealing its four
skeletal arms, each holding a wicked-looking
sword. The golem fights until the intruders
leave area 35. Then it returns to its place on
the platform. This golem hopelessly outclasses
any typical party, so the players must think of
a way past this creature (the robes work, of
course).

Long ago, Elyas specially constructed this
golem from the bones of a giant to protect the
temple. Karelena and Solorena helped the
Rahib figure out how to keep it from attacking
him.

Bone Golem: AC 2; HD 8**; hp 32; MV 120’
(40'); #AT 4; D 1d8 each arm; Save F4; ML
12; AL N; XP 1750; can only. be hit by
magical weapons; immune to charm,
sleep, hold, fire, cold, electricity, and
gases, cannot be turned

Directly behind the statue, in the floor of the
temple, is a secret door that opens over a stair-
case down to the treasure room (area 44 on the
lower level).


 

Lower Temple Level
Use Map 4 for areas 36-49.

In the lower level, check for random encount-
ers every third game turn. Roll 1d6. A result of
6 means the PCs encounter something. When
an encounter occurs, roll 1d8 and use the
resulting encounter on Table 1. Do not use
encounters 9-12.

The Rahib has made his secret quarters in
the lower level, as well as his storerooms and
prison cells.

36. MEDITATION ROOM

 

The walls of this 30-foot-wide octagonal
room are covered with aged fresco paint-
ings of trees and peaceful mountain
scenes.

 

 

 

A staircase in the north wall leads to a trap
door behind the altar in area 35 on the middle
level.

If the PCs spend more than one round in
this room, the spirit of Rahasia’s father
appears as a ghostly form. He is a haunt. See
New Monsters for details about haunts. Raha-
sia’s father is a stately elf with piercing, yet
gentle, eyes and a melodious voice, He cannot
cause or take damage. He identifies himself,
recites the following message, then disap-
pears. He will not reform or answer any ques-
tions.

 

“By the Rahie’s hand
Was | here felled
And long awaited
You to come.

“Rahasia’s pain
Ihave dearly felt
But you have come
To free her.

“Nasan is m the dungeon south;
My Gold Is toward the north.
an ally in the dragon Guard
Waits Before the gold.

“The Rahis Is But a pawn;

a darker evil lies Below.

The dragon Guard knows the story
And Guards the way Below.”

 

 

 

Rahasia’s father was brought here from the
well. The Rahib tried to force the lore of the
pendant from him, as well as repeating his

demands that Rahasia go with him unhin-
dered, When the elf refused, the Rahib slew
him in a fit of rage. The elf’s spirit refuses to
rest, however, until Rahasia is safe.

37. LIBRARY

 

This room is 20 feet square, with a 10-foot-
wide alcove in the north end of the east
wall. Shelves full of books and papers line
the north and west walls, and a thick rug
covers the floor. In the center of the room is
a large table lit by a single burning candle.
At the table, facing you, sits a dark figure.

 

 

 

This is the most important encounter on this
level. The dark figure is the Rahib. He will try
to destroy the PCs. However, if he doesn’t
think he can fight the PCs and win, he tries to
escape to area 40, where his panthers are.
Role-play the Rahib as intelligently as possi-
ble. The PCs’ best move is to rush him and
overpower him immediately. Buried under
the papers on the table is a set of keys to all the
doors in the temple.

The Rahib: AC 3; C5; hp 35; MV 60’ (20');
#AT 1 at +1; D 1d6 +1; Save C5; ML 10;
ALC; XP 200; Str 12, Int 11, Wis 16, Dex
13, Con 12, Cha 17

Spells (Clerical):

First Level: detect magic, protection from
evil

Second Level: hold person, silence 15’ radius

The Rahib is wearing chainmail +1 under a

black robe and carries a mace +1.

38. HALL

 

This is a 10-foot-wide hallway that is 20
feet long. Double doors stand at the far
ends. There are single doors at the east
ends of the north and south walls.

 

39. STUDY

 

This is a 20-foot-square room, with a 10-
foot-wide alcove at the south end of the
east wall. A table in the center of the room
is covered with diagrams, drawings, and
papers. The drawings are of Merisa, Sylva,
and Rahasia. The diagrams are plans of the
elven village, showing the houses, streets,
and places with thick brush and other cov-
er. The papers are covered with scribbled

 

 

notes.

 



There is a secret door on the north side of the
alcove that leads to the Rahib’s bedroom, area
40.

40. THE RAHIB’S BEDCHAMBER

 

This bedroom is carpeted in a plush red
color that matches the spread on the large
bed in the southeast corner of the room.
Two black panthers lie on the bed.

 

 

 

The panthers attack anyone in the room
unless the Rahib commands them not to.

Black Panthers (2): AC 4; HD 4; hp 14, 19;
MV 210’ (70'); #AT 3; D 1d4/1d4/1d8;
Save F2; ML 8; AL N; XP 75

In the study, the Rahib learned of an ancient
tunnel down to Elyas’ tower. The Rahib dis-
covered the secret door in the east wall of this
room that leads to the tunnel, area 40a.

If the Rahib gets into this room before the
PCs, he escapes through the secret door to the
tower, and may be met later. The secret door
only opens when a magical word is spoken in
the alcove. The characters can discover the
word by studying the Rahib’s notes on the
table in the study (area 39) for 1 hour, or by
studying the old books and papers in the
library (area 37) for 1 week.

40a. ANCIENT TUNNEL

This thin, dark tunnel winds down from area
40 through the gray mountain to the gates of
Elyas’ tower, area 50. The tunnel is 180 feet
long and only wide enough for one character.
This ancient tunnel was forgotten until the
Rahib discovered it.

41. RECEPTION ROOM

 

This octagonal room is 30 feet across. It has
10-foot-square alcoves in the north, south,
and west walls. These are blocked by gates
of heavy iron bars. Above the north alcove
is carved the word, “KESINI.” Above the
other alcoves are carved the word
“KESANA.” A large gong hangs before
the western wall.

 

 

 

The alcoves are magical portals. The northern
portal is a one-way receiving portal from the
roadside shrine. The southern portal sends
anything entering it to the receiving teleport
in the Hall of the Siswa, area 28 on the middle


level. The western portal sends anything
entering it to the southern alcove of the road-
side shrine.

The Rahib brings food and treasures offered
at the roadside shrine (and shipments of food
that he brought there secretly) into the temple
through the northern portal. The food is
stored in room 46 or sent to the Hall of the
Siswa, area 28 on the middle level. The gong
announces a delivery—or the arrival of
unwanted guests.

Each time something enters through the
northern portal, the gong rings with a thun-
derous noise. The iron gate is locked, of
course. Thieves have one try to unlock the gate
before the Siswa arrive. That is the only
chance the party has to avoid capture if they
enter this way. If they don’t get out, the Siswa
arrive and knock the PCs out with vials of
sleeping gas. The PCs cannot make saving
throws. The PCs wake up in prison cells f, g,
and h in area 49.

42. ULAR-TAMAN’S ROOM

 

Smooth bare stones form the walls of this
20-foot-square room, but a rough cut tun-
nel is carved in the west corner of the north
wall. In the center of the room, a glittering
snake-like reptile weaves back and forth.

 

 

 

The snake-like reptile is Ular-Taman, a crea-
ture created by Elyas long ago. Ular-Taman is
good, kind, and wise. It prefers characters of
lawful alignment. Ular-Taman can never leave
the temple.

Ular-taman guarded the only known
entrance to the ruins of Elyas’ tower, the Tow-
er Tunnel, area 44a. Out of respect for Elyas
after he died, the elves never entered the
ruins. After several generations, they forgot
that the ruins existed. The Rahib discovered
another way into the tower, from area 40.

When the Rahib took over the temple,
Ular-Taman fought a terrible battle with him
and his panthers. Ular-Taman was wounded,
but managed to drive the Rahib out of areas
42, 43, and 44. So far, the Rahib has not dared
face Ular-Taman again.

Rahasia’s father helped Ular-Taman recover
its strength. In return, Ular Taman is guarding
Rahasia’s father’s treasure until it is claimed
for Rahasia. Until it is claimed, Ular-Taman
will not leave areas 42,43, and 44.

Ular-Taman also guards a black jade ring,
which it was to keep for Hasan, but will also
entrust to Lawful PCs who speak well of Raha-
sia, her father, or Hasan. The ring is part of a

talisman of power, and is needed to release the
other part, a pendant, in area 22e.

The ring is hidden under a loose stone in
the floor. Treat the stone as a shifting wall.
Characters must search the exact center of the
room to have any chance of finding it. Ular-
Taman knows the powers of the ring and pen-
dant, but cannot speak of them unless asked,
and then only after the two are joined.

Ular-Taman: AC 2; HD 6; hp 32; MV 120’
(40'); #AT 2 or spells; D 1d4/2d6 + con-
striction; Save F6; ML 10; AL L; XP 275;
Except for his special abilities, Ular
Taman's attacks (not his appearance) are
similar to a rock python’s (giant constrict-
ing snake).

Spells (Clerical): (each spell once per day)
First Level: cure light wounds (X2), protec-
tion from evil, light

Second Level: hold person, silence 15’ radius

If the PCs talk to the reptile, they find an ally
and gain the black jade ring (if they have the
pendant). Ular-Taman also tells the PCs the
following story.

 

“Many generations ago, a wizard, called
Elyas, visited these elven people. He asked
for a place to live, where he could work in
peace and solitude. Because his heart was
true and he respected the elves and their
customs, they gave him a place in their for-
est where he built a tremendous tower. For
many years they helped him and he pro-
tected and taught them, for his magic and
learning was vast.

“Their friendship with Elyas was passed
from father to son, until even Elyas grew
old. Then disaster struck. Three horrible
witches attacked his tower. They sought a
magical gem Elyas owned—the Black Opal
Eye—for its power could make them
almost invincible.

“None of the witches dared face Elyas
alone, but together they were very power-
ful. In a fiery battle, they called down a
gray mountain to crush Elyas. As the
mountain slammed down onto his tower,
Elyas drew the witches inside it, where he
trapped them. Unfortunately, Elyas him-
self perished.

“In his memory, the elves began to
build this temple on that mountain. Many
years later a group of dwarves helped com-
plete the temple. The temple became a
place of quiet meditation and learning.
Many young elves spend a year here as stu-

 

 

 

 

dents, known as Siswa. Now, this moun-
tain is known as Gray Mountain.

“T guard the way to Elyas’ tower, but I
fear the Rahib has found another
entrance”.

 

 

 

If the PCs ask how to get to Elyas’ tower, Ular-
taman tells them about the secret door in area
44 that leads to the Tower Tunnel, area 44a.

If the PCs attack and kill Ular-Taman, it
becomes a haunt and continues to guard the
treasure and the ring. See New Monsters for
details about haunts. Characters that see a
haunt must make a successful saving throw vs.
spells or run away. Those characters absolutely
refuse to enter the area for at least 1 day.

If the PCs entered this level as captives,
Ular-Taman directs them to the south portal
in area 41 that leads to the Hall of the Siswa,
area 28 on the middle level. Then Ular-Taman
gives them directions out to the courtyard. It
also warns them that a dangerous guardian
protects the Great Temple, area 35. Ular-
Taman does not reveal any details of the
guardian’s nature, other than that it has been
in the temple since the temple was built.

Siswa are free of the Rahib’s control while
they are in areas 42, 43, or 44. However, they
fall back under the Rahib’s control when they
leave those areas.

43. TUNNEL

This 10-foot-wide tunnel runs northeast from
the room of Ular-Taman to what appears to be
a rock slide. The rock slide is actually a secret
door to room 44, where Rahasia's treasure is.

44, TREASURE ROOM

 

This 30-foot-wide (east to west) by 20-foot-
deep room holds a treasure of tremendous
wealth! A solid metal door is set into the
east end of the south wall.

 

 

 

The metal door leads to area 45, the stair of
locks. No one can open the door unless its lock
is picked or unlocked with the keys from area
37, the library.

The treasure is in the center of the room. It
includes: 800 gp, a sword +1, a snake staff, a
ring of animal control, a potion of healing, a
marble jar with 6 inlaid gems (worth 1,000
gp), 2 platinum birds (worth 700 gp each),
and 12 gems (each worth 100 gp).

A secret door in the north wall leads to the
Tower Tunnel, area 44a.


 

44a. TOWER TUNNEL

This 200-foot-long tunnel leads from area 44
on the lower temple level to the gates of Elyas’
tower, area 50. The first 30-foot length of the
tunnel is eight feet wide. From that point on,
the tunnel quickly narrows so only one charac-
ter can squeeze through.

45. STAIR OF LOCKS

This stairway descends from the secret trap
door behind the statue in area 35 (the great
temple on the middle level) to area 44 on the
lower level. This stairway is blocked by not
one, but three strong metal doors. The only
way to pass them is to pick their locks or open
them with the keys in the library, area 37 on
the middle level. The Rahib does not know
about this stairway or the secret trap door in
the great temple.

46. STORAGE ROOM

 

This is a 20-foot-square room. There are
boxes and several broken jars on the floor.
The room also contains crude ovens and

 

 

casks of wine.

 

This is where supplies are kept and food is
cooked for the Siswa. One of the boxes con-
tains brown robes. Eight giant rats prowl in
this room. They attack anything that moves
into this room unless distracted with food.

Giant Rats (8): AC 7; HD 1d4 hp; hp 4, 4, 4,
4, 2, 1, 1, 1; MV 120° (40'); #AT 1; D 143
+ disease; Save NM; ML 8; AL N; XP 3

47. GUARDROOM

 

Double doors open into this guardroom.
Four Siswa guards in chainmail are posted
here. Directly across the room is another
set of double doors.

 

 

 

The guards’ orders are to let no one pass unless
the Rahib is present and instructs them other-
wise. The guard leader carries the keys to all
the cells in area 49.

If the PCs are escaping from the cells, you
may reduce the number of guards in this area
to make their escape possible; assume the oth-
er guards are with the Rahib.

Siswa Guards (4): AC 4; E2; hp 10, 8, 6, 4;
MV 120’ (40’); #AT 1; D 1d8; Save E2; ML
8; AL C; XP 20

48. WELL BOTTOM

 

This is the bottom of a deep, 10-foot-wide
shaft that extends straight upward into
darkness. It is sealed off from the hallway
at its base by a heavy iron gate. Piled at the
bottom of the well are stuffed leather mats
that prevent damage from a fall down the
shaft. The walls of the well are damp and

 

 

too slippery for even a thief to climb.

 

The iron gate is locked. Trying to smash
through the gate alerts the guards. The alert-
ed guards use vials of sleeping gas to capture
the PCs before they can break through. To get
through quietly, the PCs must pick the lock.

49. PRISON CELLS

 

A long, dark hallway runs east and west.
Heavy wooden doors with barred windows
line both sides of the central hallway. A
similar door stands at the east end of the
hallway. A gate of iron bars blocks the west

 

 

end.

 

The cells are 10 feet square and empty except
as noted below. The keys to all the cells are
carried by the guard leader in area 47.
Another set of keys is in the library, area 37.
If the PCs are captured, they are locked in
cells f, g, and h. If the entire party is captured,
encourage them to plan their own escape. Any
reasonable plan will work—for example a

thief might pick the door lock with a piece of
scrap metal, a very strong character may work
a door bar loose, or the PCs may plot to sum-
mon and ambush the guards. Captured PCs’
weapons and other equipment is piled in
cells, which is not locked. Other prisoners can
only be freed by picking the locks to their cells
or using the keys.

Locked in cell b is a tall human fighter
named Baik Telor. He wandered into the road-
side shrine and was caught by the Siswa. He
will gladly join the party if he is given weap-
ons. He is wearing chainmail, and his dress is
somewhat Arabian—turban and loose silk
breeches.

Baik Telor, Human Fighter: AC 5; F4; hp 24;
MV 120’ (20'); #AT 1 at + 1; D unarmed;
Save F4; ML 10; ALL; XP 50; Str 15; Int 9;
Wis 12; Dex 10; Con 9; Cha 13

Baik Telor is wearing chainmail.

Hasan is locked in cell 49q. He has no weap-
ons or armor. Although he is tired, he is ready
and willing to join the PCs against the Rahib.

Hasan: AC 8; E2; hp 8; MV 120’ (40’); #AT 1;
D unarmed; Save E2; ML 10; ALL; XP 20;
Str 12; Int 16; Wis 10; Dex 13; Con 10;
Cha 13

Cell r is filled with old bones. The Rahib gives
them to Karelena and Solorena. They use the
bones to create skeletons that sometimes
appear as wandering monsters.

 

ELYAS’ TOWER

 

The adventure in Elyas’ Tower forms the sec-
ond half of this adventure. The characters can
be allowed to rest in the elven village before
continuing.

Halls of Grandeur
Use Map 5 for areas 50-84.

The upper floors of Elyas’ tower were com-
pletely destroyed in the battle between Elyas
and the three witch sisters, Karelena,
Solorena, and Trilena. Much of the remaining
tower was scorched by fires that raged after the
combat.

In the Halls of Grandeur, check for random
encounters every third game turn. Roll 1d6. A
result of 6 means the PCs encounter some-
thing. When an encounter occurs, roll 1d6
and use the resulting encounter on Table 3
(inside back cover).



50. GATES OF THE TOWER

 

The tunnel opens into a dark, dry cavern,
deep within the mountain. No sound
breaks the silence in the cavern. Gray stone
walls rise up 60 feet to the cavern’s rock
and earth ceiling. This structure appears to
be an ancient tower, buried under the
mountain. Only the lowest story of the
tower is intact. What little of the upper
stories is visible is destroyed. Cut stones
from walls and battlements lie scattered
about the cavern floor. The cavern has
caved in around the sides of the tower so
only the front is visible. Darkly stained
doors stand in the tower's front wall.
Unrecognizable engravings cover those
metal doors.

 

 

 


 

The doors are the only entrance to the tower.
The doors are unlocked, but difficult to open;
characters must apply 25 strength points to
open the doors far enough to enter area 51.

51. CORRIDOR OF THE
UNEXPECTED

 

This is a long 10-foot-wide majestic corri-
dor. Its walls rise 30 feet to an arched ceil-
ing. The walls and the ceiling are streaked
with soot. The corridor leads north into the
darkness of the tower.

 

 

 

The corridor is 40 feet long. Two thieves hide
in the shadows near the north end of the corri-
dor. When the PCs enter, the thieves try to
surprise them and attack. If the thieves do not
surprise the PCs, or are captured, they try to
bluff their way out.

Bandits (2): AC 6; T1; hp 6, 4; MV 40’; #AT

1; ; D 1d6; Save T1; ML 8 AL C; XP 10
These bandits are wearing leather armor and
are armed with short swords.

These thieves followed the Rahib into the
temple to the tower. They have not been in
the tower very long. They went down the west
corridor where all they found was a burned
library and some wine.

One bandit carries 30 sp in a pouch. The
other carries 200 gp in a leather back pack and
a 400-gp gem hidden in the hollow hilt of his
dagger. Each bandit is carrying a bottle of
Sour Wine. See area 72 for an explanation of
the use and effects of drinking this wine.

52. HALL OF RUBBLE

 

This is a tremendous hall, filled with bro-
ken and charred beams and rubble. The
rubble has been moved to the center of the
room. Overhead, the ceiling is broken
through by beams and stones.

 

 

 

The northernmost 10 feet of this room slopes
gently downward to the north. Dwarves have
their normal chance to detect the slope, if they
look for sloping passages.

Each turn a character searches the rubble,
roll 1d6. If the result is a 1 or a 2, the character
finds one of 10 100-gp gems hidden in the
rubble. Characters may search as long as they
wish, but searching is noisy. After 4 turns of
searching, roll for a random encounter on
Table 3 every turn until they stop searching.

53. INNER HALL

 

This dark, 30-foot-wide hall has a flat ceil-
ing. Two alcoves are set in the east wall,
and two in the west wall. The alcoves are 10
feet high and 10 feet deep. A plush, red
velvet curtain hangs across the north end of
the hall.

 

 

 

This hall is 50 feet long, and slopes gently
downward to the north. Dwarves have their
normal chance to detect the slope. The curtain
blocks all light from area 54, but is easily
moved aside.

54. TOMB OF SOULS

 

Most of this room is taken up by a plat-
form. Three steps lead up to the platform.
A brazier, standing in the middle of the
platform blazing with bright blue flame,
illuminates this room. Three stone coffins
are arranged in a triangle around the bra-
zier. The largest coffin stands at the front
of the platform. The coffins are covered
with mysterious carvings. At the back of
the platform, is an ornate cast-iron throne.
To the left of the throne, a metal stand
supports a large, ancient, leather-bound
book. The book is closed, its cracked cover
held by a metal clasp. A long quill pen lies
on top of the book. The stand is turned so
that the book, if opened, faces the throne.

 

 

 

The coffins are marked A, B, and C on the
map. See encounter areas 54A, 54B, and 54C
for details about these coffins. The brazier is
fixed to the floor and cannot be removed. The
flame burns without heat or smoke and can-
not be extinguished. The coals continue to
burn after being removed from the brazier,
each coal lighting an area 10 feet in diameter.
The throne is a receiving teleport from the
throne in area 100. Sitting on the throne here
has no effect.

The Book of Years and its quill, Windscribe
have been waiting here for quite some time.
They are both intelligent and protected by a
spell that allows only Lawful characters to
touch them.

The book, when opened, says, “Receive the
tale of years!"” But the pages of the book are all
blank! The book then recites the following
story. The book does nothing else.

 

“Come woodland folk and gather near,
The tale of the wizard's keep to hear.
Whence, long aGo In a YOUNGER age,
The Black Opal was held By Elyas the
mace.

“the opal increased his magical grace,
But he kept the stone in an open place.
Three witches, wishing to heighten
their power,

Rained flame and stone upon his tower.

“€lyas trapped each witch in a dragon's
eye.

But without the opal, they 51d not die.
As Elyas Raced to RetRIEvE the stone,

4 Granite mountain crushed the mage
and his home.

“the spell ne'er completed, the three
witches wait

In eternal suspension until By some fate
Their souls are Released upon innocence
sweet

Then revenge they will Reap upon all
that they meet.”

 

 

 

The quill answers up to five yes/no questions
with an 80% chance of accuracy. Windscribe
only answers questions for Lawful characters.
If asked about the tower floorplan, the quill
flies to the parchment the PCs are mapping on
and draws a rough map of area 100, and areas
87, 102, and 105. Windscribe does not
include secret doors in its map.

54A. KARALENA’S CRYPT

 

This is the largest of the crypts. It is covered
with unknown symbols. The lid is sealed to
the base on all four sides with lead. Each
lead seal is inscribed with a mysterious
symbol.

 

 

 

All PCs attempting to lift the lid of the coffin
must add their strengths together. Roll 2420.
If the PCs’ combined strengths total more
than the result of the dice roll, they break the
seals and open the lid.

The skeleton of a woman covered with the
tattered remains of a deep blue robe lies with-
in the coffin. A secret panel in the bottom of
the coffin conceals 1,000 cp, 800 ep, and 500

gp.


 

The doors are the only entrance to the tower.
The doors are unlocked, but difficult to open;
characters must apply 25 strength points to
open the doors far enough to enter area 51.

51. CORRIDOR OF THE
UNEXPECTED

 

This is a long 10-foot-wide majestic corri-
dor. Its walls rise 30 feet to an arched ceil-
ing. The walls and the ceiling are streaked
with soot. The corridor leads north into the
darkness of the tower.

 

 

 

The corridor is 40 feet long. Two thieves hide
in the shadows near the north end of the corri-
dor. When the PCs enter, the thieves try to
surprise them and attack. If the thieves do not
surprise the PCs, or are captured, they try to
bluff their way out.

Bandits (2): AC 6; T1; hp 6, 4; MV 40’; #AT

1; ; D 1d6; Save T1; ML 8 AL C; XP 10
These bandits are wearing leather armor and
are armed with short swords.

These thieves followed the Rahib into the
temple to the tower. They have not been in
the tower very long. They went down the west
corridor where all they found was a burned
library and some wine.

One bandit carries 30 sp in a pouch. The
other carries 200 gp in a leather back pack and
a 400-gp gem hidden in the hollow hilt of his
dagger. Each bandit is carrying a bottle of
Sour Wine. See area 72 for an explanation of
the use and effects of drinking this wine.

52. HALL OF RUBBLE

 

This is a tremendous hall, filled with bro-
ken and charred beams and rubble. The
rubble has been moved to the center of the
room. Overhead, the ceiling is broken
through by beams and stones.

 

 

 

The northernmost 10 feet of this room slopes
gently downward to the north. Dwarves have
their normal chance to detect the slope, if they
look for sloping passages.

Each turn a character searches the rubble,
roll 1d6. If the result is a 1 or a 2, the character
finds one of 10 100-gp gems hidden in the
rubble. Characters may search as long as they
wish, but searching is noisy. After 4 turns of
searching, roll for a random encounter on
Table 3 every turn until they stop searching.

53. INNER HALL

 

This dark, 30-foot-wide hall has a flat ceil-
ing. Two alcoves are set in the east wall,
and two in the west wall. The alcoves are 10
feet high and 10 feet deep. A plush, red
velvet curtain hangs across the north end of
the hall.

 

 

 

This hall is 50 feet long, and slopes gently
downward to the north. Dwarves have their
normal chance to detect the slope. The curtain
blocks all light from area 54, but is easily
moved aside.

54. TOMB OF SOULS

 

Most of this room is taken up by a plat-
form. Three steps lead up to the platform.
A brazier, standing in the middle of the
platform blazing with bright blue flame,
illuminates this room. Three stone coffins
are arranged in a triangle around the bra-
zier. The largest coffin stands at the front
of the platform. The coffins are covered
with mysterious carvings. At the back of
the platform, is an ornate cast-iron throne.
To the left of the throne, a metal stand
supports a large, ancient, leather-bound
book. The book is closed, its cracked cover
held by a metal clasp. A long quill pen lies
on top of the book. The stand is turned so
that the book, if opened, faces the throne.

 

 

 

The coffins are marked A, B, and C on the
map. See encounter areas 54A, 54B, and 54C
for details about these coffins. The brazier is
fixed to the floor and cannot be removed. The
flame burns without heat or smoke and can-
not be extinguished. The coals continue to
burn after being removed from the brazier,
each coal lighting an area 10 feet in diameter.
The throne is a receiving teleport from the
throne in area 100. Sitting on the throne here
has no effect.

The Book of Years and its quill, Windscribe
have been waiting here for quite some time.
They are both intelligent and protected by a
spell that allows only Lawful characters to
touch them.

The book, when opened, says, “Receive the
tale of years!"” But the pages of the book are all
blank! The book then recites the following
story. The book does nothing else.

 

“Come woodland folk and gather near,
The tale of the wizard's keep to hear.
Whence, long aGo In a YOUNGER age,
The Black Opal was held By Elyas the
mace.

“the opal increased his magical grace,
But he kept the stone in an open place.
Three witches, wishing to heighten
their power,

Rained flame and stone upon his tower.

“€lyas trapped each witch in a dragon's
eye.

But without the opal, they 51d not die.
As Elyas Raced to RetRIEvE the stone,

4 Granite mountain crushed the mage
and his home.

“the spell ne'er completed, the three
witches wait

In eternal suspension until By some fate
Their souls are Released upon innocence
sweet

Then revenge they will Reap upon all
that they meet.”

 

 

 

The quill answers up to five yes/no questions
with an 80% chance of accuracy. Windscribe
only answers questions for Lawful characters.
If asked about the tower floorplan, the quill
flies to the parchment the PCs are mapping on
and draws a rough map of area 100, and areas
87, 102, and 105. Windscribe does not
include secret doors in its map.

54A. KARALENA’S CRYPT

 

This is the largest of the crypts. It is covered
with unknown symbols. The lid is sealed to
the base on all four sides with lead. Each
lead seal is inscribed with a mysterious
symbol.

 

 

 

All PCs attempting to lift the lid of the coffin
must add their strengths together. Roll 2420.
If the PCs’ combined strengths total more
than the result of the dice roll, they break the
seals and open the lid.

The skeleton of a woman covered with the
tattered remains of a deep blue robe lies with-
in the coffin. A secret panel in the bottom of
the coffin conceals 1,000 cp, 800 ep, and 500

gp.


 

This coffin is covered with carvings of
unfamiliar design. The seals on all four
sides of this coffin are broken.

 

 

 

All PCs attempting to lift the lid of the coffin
must add their strengths together. Roll 2420.
If the PCs’ combined strengths total more
than the result of the dice roll, they lift the
lid.

A woman's skeleton wearing rusting chain
mail armor and rotting furs lies in the coffin.
One hand holds a nicked non-magical sword
across its ribcage. The other hand holds a
scroll across the sword. The sword cannot be
removed from the skeleton’s hand by the PCs.
If the scroll is read, the skeleton attacks the PC
reading the scroll.

 

“A second chance is seldom found
To revenge those beneath the ground.
On ye this fate I do intone

 

 

That you may feel the strength of bone.”

 

Skeleton: AC 4; HD 1; hp 8; MV 60’ (20);
#AT 1; D 1d6; Save F1; ML12; AL C; XP


54C. TRILENA’S CRYPT

 

This coffin is covered with mystical runes.
There are unbroken lead seals on each of
the four corners of the lid.

 

 

 

All PCs attempting to lift the lid of the coffin
must add their strengths together. Roll 2420.
If the PCs’ combined strengths total more
than the result of the dice roll, they break the
seals and open the lid.

The skeleton of a woman covered with the
tattered remains of a flowing red dress lies
within the coffin. There is no treasure here.

55. OUTER WEST VAULT

 

Faded frescos of golden towers and dia-
mond trees cover the walls and ceiling of
this 30-foot-square room. In the center of
the room sits a 10-foot-square cube of
stone. A ladder leans against the south end
of the east wall.

 

 

 

The floor in this room is level. On the west
side of the cube is a secret door to area 56.
Another secret door, at the top of the ladder,
leads to area 54.

56. INNER WEST VAULT

This vault is empty.

57. WEST STAIRS

This long dark staircase slopes down to the
north. It is safe to move on.

58. OUTER EAST VAULT

 

The walls of this 30-foot-square room are
meticulously clean. A ladder leans against
the south end of the west wall. A 10-foot-
square cube sits in the center of the room.

 

 

 

A gelatinous cube is hiding behind the stone
cube. It attacks the PCs on sight. There are 60
ep, 40 gp, and one 50-gp gem inside the crea-
ture.

Gelatinous Cube: AC 8; HD 4*; hp 15; MV
60' (20'); #AT 1; D 2d4 + paralysis; Save
F2; M 12; ALN; XP 125

59. INNER EAST VAUIT

After the PCs find and open the secret door to
this vault, they see a closed chest on the floor
against the far wall.

When any character steps on the floor of the
vault, a secret panel in the ceiling opens and a
pendulum blade swings down, directly in line
with the door. Any character standing in the
vault must roll his dexterity score or less on
1d20 to avoid being hit by the blade. When it
hits, the blade causes 1d8 points of damage.
The blade swings once every round that there
is a character on the floor of the vault. When
the vault is empty, the blade swings back up
into the secret compartment and the panel
closes.

The locked chest contains: 5,000 cp, 100
gp, 20 pp, and three bottles of Superb Wine.
The numbers on the wine labels are a code
that can help the PCs pass safely through area
92 (see the champagne label).

Anyone, monster or character, who drinks
the Superb Wine falls unconscious for 2 turns.
After reviving, the character remembers a
nightmare in which a large black gem was
hanging in a setting on the end of a chain.
The character also remembers a sense of dizzi-
ness and being in an empty room with a silver
arch (area 105).

Characters who drink this wine remain
drunk for 1d4 turns after they awaken. Dur-
ing that time, they attack at — 4. Drunk char-
acters cannot move quietly.



RAHASIA

 

L
YL) fy
W CU ies Y

rN
AAS

os

ONS
NA

 

60. EAST STAIRS

This long, dark staircase slopes down to the
north. When any PC steps anywhere on the
top 10 feet of the stairs, the stairs suddenly
swing flat, forming a slide to area 58. Each PC
on the stairs must roll his dexterity score or less
on 1d20, with a —4 penalty to the dexterity
score, to avoid falling. Characters not on the
stairs are in no danger. Characters at the bot-
tom may use a rope to climb up the slide if
someone at the top (who is not on the stairs)
holds the rope.

61. WEST CORRIDOR

 

This 10-foot-wide arched corridor extends
east and west. The floors, walls, and 30-
foot-tall arched ceiling are all coated with a
thick layer of black soot.

 

 

 

The double doors at the west end of the corri-

dor are bronze. All other doors are wood and
badly scorched.


 

62. EMPTY PRISON CELLS

These prison cells are 20 feet square. Walls in
the centers of the cells make them U-shaped.
Two of the cells have fresh straw bedding and
unspoiled food inside. The other cells appear
long unused. The Rahib imprisoned Merisa
and Sylva in the two cells closest to corridor 61
before the witches took over their bodies.
Merisa hid a silver bracelet under the mattress
in the southernmost cell as a clue for anyone
trying to rescue her. The name “‘Merisa” is
engraved on the inside of the bracelet.

63. MIRYALA’S CELL

 

Piteous weeping comes from within this
cell.

 

 

 

An elven maiden, Miryala, is chained to the
wall with leg irons in the southeast part of the
cell. She cowers in fear when the PCs
approach. She is tired, dizzy, and hungry. She
currently has no spells.

Miryala: AC 9; E1; hp 6; MV 120’ (40'); #AT
1; D Unarmed; Save E1; ML 5; ALN

Miryala’s kidnapping was not discovered until
after the PCs left the elven village. The Rahib
is keeping her here until she recovers enough
for Trilena to take over her body. Trilena
would prefer someone with a higher charisma
(such as Rahasia), but doesn’t want to wait
much longer. Miryala knows nothing about
her captors or the tower.

64. SPIDER LAIR

 

Thick cobwebs cover the walls and ceiling
of this cell. Within the cobwebs, some-
thing moves slowly.

 

 

 

A black widow spider in the web attacks any-
one who approaches the web.

Black Widow Spider: AC 6; HD 3*; hp 20;
MV 60’ (20'); #AT 1; D 2d6 + poison;
Save F2; ML 8; ALN; XP 50

The bones and clothing of a dead adventurer
hang in the web in the northeast corner of the
room. The adventurer was a woman wearing
leather armor. There are two daggers and a
leather pouch on her belt. The pouch contains
50 gp, 20 pp, and 10 50-gp gems.

The Rahib eventually throws his unwanted
prisoners to the spider. The adventurer in the
web was not a prisoner—just unlucky.

65. MAGICIAN’S CELL

 

As the door opens, you hear a metallic

 

 

clank and something moving in the cell.

 

A magician named Merdiz is chained by leg
irons to the wall in the northwest corner of the
cell. He casts a sleep spell at the PCs on sight.
Then he uses his spells, as needed, to defeat
the PCs.

Merdiz, Human Magician: AC 8; M4; hp 9;
MV 120’ (40’); #AT 1; D Unarmed; Save
M4; ML 10; ALN; XP 50

Spells:

First Level: sleep, light
Second Level: web, wizard lock

If Merdiz defeats the PCs, he uses their weap-
ons to break his chains, robs them, and then
escapes. If the PCs defeat him, Merdiz apolo-
gizes and asks for help.

Merdiz was exploring the tower when Kare-
lena and Solorena surprised and captured
him. Unless the PCs explain otherwise, Mer-
diz thinks that they work for the witches. He
has not had anything to eat or drink for 3
days. If asked about the tower, he knows only
that there is a magical book in room 54 that he
cannot touch.

The witches were eventually going to feed
Merdiz to the spider in cell 64.

66. CONNECTING CORRIDOR

This is a bare corridor, 20 feet long and 10 feet
wide.

67. WEST ILLUSION ROOM

 

This is a 20-foot-wide room that extends
30 feet to the west. Against the west wall, a
glittering pile of gold and jewels beckons.

 

 

 

This room is actually only 20 feet square. The
west wall is an illusion, All characters must
make a saving throw vs. spells each round they
look at the wall. Those who fail run recklessly
into the wall, trying to get at the imagined
treasure, taking 1d4 points of damage from
the collision. PCs can avoid this trap by not
looking at the illusion.

68. EAST ILLUSION ROOM

 

A huge red dragon in the room raises its
head and belches a searing blast of flame at

 

 

you!

 



The dragon is only an illusion. All characters
who see the dragon must make saving throws
vs. spells. Characters who make their saving
throws do not believe the illusion and are not
affected by it. Those who fail their saving
throws actually believe that they were blasted
by the flaming breath of a dragon and faint on
the spot, believing they are dead.

They revive on their own within 1d6 game
turns. If another character tries to revive
them, the unconscious characters revive with-
in 1d6 rounds. Once a character has been
“killed” by this illusion, he disbelieves the
illusion.

This illusion and the one in area 67 are per-
manent illusions created long ago by Elyas.
They distracted anyone who sought to enter
Elyas’ laboratory uninvited.

69. CURTAIN OF LIGHT

 

The entire southern wall of this 20-foot-
square room blazes with red light.

 

 

 

This room is really 30 feet deep. The southern
wall is an illusionary curtain of light. Charac-
ters who walk forward through the curtain of
light see a blinding flash, then find them-
selves walking back out of the curtain into the
same place they left. Only characters who walk
backward through the curtain of light pass
through to the southern part of the room and
area 70.

70. ELYAS’ LABORATORY

 

‘Two rows of tables covered with lab equip-
ment stand in the center of this room.
Dust covers the ancient glass beakers; the
brass coils are tarnished with age. Cobwebs
hang like lace between the cracked jars on
the shelves. Two alcoves are in the east
wall. A woman’s hat with a pink feather on
it hangs on a peg between the alcoves.

 

 

 

The alcoves are teleporters. The northern
alcove is the receiving end of the teleporter in
room 89. Elyas decided to add some variety to
his teleporter system, and used a flashy hat to
activate his lab teleporter. If a character puts
on the hat and enters the southern alcove, the
character magically appears in the alcove in
room 90. The hat then reappears on the wall
peg. The hat is needed to operate the teleport-
er leading to room 90. It has no other magical
power.

The ancient contents of the jars crumbled
into useless dust long ago. The lab equipment
is also useless.


 

71. LIBRARY

 

The charred remains of a long, elegant
table run the length of the room north to
south. Broken bookcases, also burned,
cover the north, west, and south walls. The
burned leather covers of books are scat-
tered in the shelves and on the floor.

 

 

 

If PCs spend 3 turns searching the shelves,
they find a single page of parchment under a
scorched book cover. The page itself is
scorched and stained, but parts of the writing
are still legible. The text that can be read is:

 

“Once the three are snared in the trap I
have prepared for them, I. . . after this, I
will take it to the throne and . . . the
destruction shall signal . . . banished for all
eternity.”

 

72. MAP ROOM

 

The walls of this room are lined with racks
holding map cases. This room was not
touched by the fires that gutted much of
the rest of this level. An elegant solid
wooden table stands in the center of the
room.

 

 

 

Seventy-five bottles of Sour Wine are hidden
in various map cases. Each time a character
opens a map case, secretly roll 1d6. If the
result is a 1 or 2, the character finds one of the
bottles (see the “grapemash”’ label).

The numbers on the labels are a code that
can help the PCs pass safely through area 94.

Anyone who drinks the Sour Wine falls
unconscious for 1d6 turns. Upon waking up,
the drinker remembers a nightmare in which
three dragons stand in a circle glaring at a
smaller dragon with only one eye. (These are
actually the stone dragon heads in room 100.)

73. WESTERN STAIRS

Cobwebs line both sides of this staircase.
There are more and more webs farther in, but
this staircase is perfectly safe.

74. EAST PASSAGE

TRE
re

jaye NG »)

aoe
Celie |
Milica }

yy,

 

The carved metal doors are made of finely-
tooled bronze. The carved shapes have no
meaning, however.

75. OBSTRUCTED STAIRWAY

 

This fine marble staircase circles upward.
Great blocks of stone and splintered tim-

 

 

bers block its passage to the levels above.

 

All the upper levels were gutted during the
battle between the wizard Elyas and the three
witches. The contents and furnishings of the
upper level were totally destroyed. The debris
that blocks this stairway is from the upper
walls. The PCs cannot clear the stairway.

76. KITCHEN

 

This passage extends 20 feet east to a pair
of carved metal doors. A north-south hall-
way crosses this passage just in front of the

 

 

doors.

A large wooden butcher's block stands in
the center of the room, a cleaver imbedded
in its surface. The pleasant smell of good

 

food hangs in the air.

 



This kitchen is 20 feet wide by 30 feet long.
Examination of the cupboards reveals that the
plates and cups are all clean. The shelves are
well stocked with roasted meat, cheeses,
breads, and fruits—all fresh. There are obvi-
ous signs of recent use. The cleaver can be
used as a weapon, inflicting 1d4 points of
damage per hit.

If the PCs spend more than 2 turns in this
room, one of the witches, Karelena arrives
with her panther. Karelena and her powers are
described in the Appendix under New Mon-
sters. She orders her panther to attack, then
casts a hold portal spell to lock the door
behind her as she escapes. If the PCs pursue
her, Karelena uses the blue disk in room 84 to
escape. Remember that she is using Merisa’s
body.

Karelena, Witch: (AC 9; M1; hp 5; MV 120’
(40'); #AT 1; D 1d4; Save M1; Morale 6;
AL C; XP 10

Spells: (2 of the following)

First Level: shield, hold portal, sleep

Black Panther: (AC 4; HD 4; hp 14; MV 210’

(70); #AT 3; D 1d4/1d4/1d8; Save F2;
Morale 8; AL N; XP 75

77. GAS-FILLED ROOM

 

Shelves line the walls of this 20-foot-square
room. The shelves are filled with dusty jars
and bottles of all types. The room is full of
a strange, sickening odor that makes
breathing difficult. Torch flames dim in
this room. Tiny red eyes gleam from the
back of the room.

 

 

 

This room is full of explosive gas from leaking
bottles. If the PCs extinguish all fires (except
lanterns) or keep the door to the room open,
the gas is not dangerous. Each turn the PCs

. burn an open flame and keep the door closed,

there is a chance that the gas explodes. Each
turn the PCs burn an open flame in the closed
room, roll 1d6. If the result is 1, the gas
explodes. Everyone inside the room suffers
2d6 points of damage from the blast. Charac-
ters who make successful saving throws vs.
death only suffer half damage.

The gleaming red eyes belong to a pack of
giant rats. The rats attack anyone who enters
this room.

Giant Rats (8): (AC 7; HD 1d4 points; hp 4,
3, 3,3, 3,3, 2, 2; MV 120’ (40’); #AT 1;D
1d3 + disease; Save NM; M 8; ALN; XP 3


 

The jars are filled with old chemicals and
potion ingredients. The contents are all now
worthless.

78. EMPTY STOREROOM

 

Empty shelves line the walls of this room.
There is a musty smell in the air.

 

 

   

82. WINE CELLAR

 

This small room is damp and cool. Racks
filled with wine bottles line the north and
south walls.

 

 

 

There are 125 bottles of Good Wine here (see
the “crush” label).

 

This room has been unused for a long time.
There is nothing here of interest.

79. BLASTED ROOM

 

A hole large enough for a man to pass
through has been blasted through the
northernmost part of the east wall. All the
walls are scorched and pitted, as from a
massive explosion.

 

 

 

The hole in the wall leads to the stairs, area
81. Characters will have no trouble passing
through here.

80. ORCS’ ROOM

 

Torches in sconces illuminate this 20-foot-
square room. Huddled in the southeast
corner of the room, five dark, hunched fig-
ures argue among themselves. At the
northeast corner of the room lies an open
stone box.

 

 

 

The dark, hunched figures are orcs. Their
argument is so loud and intense that they are
surprised on a roll of 1-4 on 1d6.

Ores (5): (AC 6; HD 1; hp 8, 7, 7, 6, 5; MV
120’ (40'); #AT 1; D 1d6; ML 8; Save F1;
AL C; XP 10

Each orc is carrying 1d10 x 10 sp. The stone
box contains 100 gp, 500 ep, 50 pp, a mace +
1 and three bottles of Good Wine. See the
description in room 82 for the use of this wine
and the effects of drinking it.

81. EASTERN STAIRS

   

 

The southern flight of stairs is covered with
rubble, though it is passable. The corner
wall collapsed here. It is possible to climb
the rubble into a hole in the wall.

 

 

 

The hole leads to area 79. Characters will have
no trouble passing through here.

\ \
= iy)
x) Mp
WE

Any character who drinks this Good Wine
falls unconscious for 1 or 2 turns. Upon reviv-
ing, the character remembers a vision of a
stone obelisk demanding the answer to a
question. The character feels as if the answer is
known, but he cannot remember it.

After reviving, the character is drunk and
clumsy for 1d4 turns, making all attacks at —
2. Make a random encounter check every turn
due to the noise drunk characters make.

The numbers on the label are a code that
can help the PCs pass safely through the west-
ern teleport maze, area 93.

83. UPPER HALL OF STATUES

 

Two alcoves are cut into both sides of this
10-foot-wide hall. Several shadowy figures
stand silently in each alcove.

 

 

 

This hall is 50 feet long. At each end of the
corridor stand pairs of bronze doors, carved
with delicate designs.

Each alcove contains one or two life-sized
platinum statues of adventurers: humans,
dwarves, elves, and halflings. All of them are
posed in running positions, their hands and
arms outstretched. Broad smiles cover their
faces. The sculpting is very skillful, with
extremely life-like detail work on each statue.
The statues are surprisingly light; they weigh
about as much as an average person. The plat-
inum is only a surface layer, as each of the
statues is composed of layers of different
metals: platinum, gold, electrum, silver, and
copper, with most of the metal being copper.
Each statue is worth 2d6 x 20 gp.

These statues are all converted thieves and
adventurers who stepped through the magical
transmuters in room 87. When the witches are
destroyed, these adventurers change from
statues back to normal.

84. WELL OF WHISPERS

 

This is a 30-foot-diameter circular room.
Its domed ceiling is 30 feet overhead. The
entrance to this room is a pair of bronze
doors in the west wall. A 10-foot-diameter
well drops down into darkness from the
center of the room. Stone statues stand to
the north, south, and east of the well. Soft
moans whisper through the room.

On the wall between the eastern statue
and the northern statue is carved the single
word “Pah.” The word ““Nwad”’ is carved
on the wall between the the eastern statue
and the southern statue.

 

 

 

Natural air movements over the statues’
mouths make the moaning sounds. The well
is 1,000 feet deep. It is the shaft of a magical
elevator that connects this level and the lower
level of Elyas’ tower. At the bottom of the
shaft, in room 85, a glowing blue disc, 2 feet
in diameter, rests on an ornate stone pedestal.
The words “Pah” and ‘“‘Nwad” carved in the
walls of rooms 84 and 85 activate the elevator.

When the word “Pah” is spoken, the disc ris-
es from the pedestal in room 85 to the top of the
well-shaft in room 84. As it nears the top, it
slows down and gently floats to a stop. When
the word “Nwad” is spoken, the disc descends
gently and comes to rest atop the pedestal in
room 85. The disc is cool to the touch and easily
supports 20,000 coin weight. Passengers are in
no danger of falling off the disc. The disc cannot
be removed from the shaft.


 

Elyas’ Treasury
Use Map 6 for areas 85-95.

Buried deep under ground, this level housed
the wizard’s treasury. This level was the most
secure part of his tower. It was to this place
that Elyas the Wizard lured the three witches,
and here that he trapped them.

In this level, check for random encounters
every third game turn. Roll 1d6. A result of 6
means the PCs encounter something. When
an encounter occurs, roll 1d12 and use the
resulting encounter on Table 3.

85. BOTTOM OF THE WELL

If the PCs enter this room from area 84, use
the first boxed description. If the PCs enter
this room from area 86, use the second boxed
description.

 

The blue disc comes to rest atop an ornate
carved pedestal in the center of a 30-foot-
diameter room. This room is identical to
the room above; the three statues and the
bronze doors are copies of the ones in that
room. The word “Pah” is carved in the
wall between the east and north statues.
The word “Nwad”’ is carved in the wall
between the south and east statues.

 

 

In the center of this 30-foot-diameter room
stands a short round pedestal covered with
ornate carvings. A glowing blue disc, 2 feet
in diameter, lies atop the pedestal. Three
15-foot-tall statues of men stand around
the pedestal at the north, south, and east
sides of the room. They seem to stare at
you with hollow eyes. Each statue makes
an eerie moaning sound, as if in pain. On
the wall between the eastern statue and the
northern statue is carved the single word
“Pah.” The word ‘“‘Nwad"’ is carved
between the eastern statue and the south-
ern statue. A 10-foot-diameter shaft rises
from the domed ceiling, directly above the
pedestal and the glowing disk. The shaft
extends upward as far as you can see.

 

 

 

Natural air movements over the statues’
mouths cause the moaning sounds. The disk is
an elevator that moves up and down in the
shaft. The shaft rises 1,000 feet to room 84.
Thieves can attempt to climb the shaft. See
area 84 for an explanation of how the elevator
works.

86. LOWER HALL OF STATUES

88. CORRIDOR

 

Three alcoves are cut into each side of this
10-foot-wide hall. Several shadowy figures
stand silently in each alcove.

 

 

 

This hall is 70 feet long. At each end of the
corridor stand pairs of bronze doors, carved
with delicate designs. Each alcove contains
one or two life-sized platinum statues like
those in area 83. See area 83 for details about
these statues.

87. TRANSMUTER TRAP

 

This 20-foot-square room is bathed in soft
golden light. Glowing 15-foot-wide silver
arches open through the north and south
walls, A pair of ornate bronze doors stands
in the center of the east wall. A pair of steel
doors, carved with similar decorations, is
set in the west wall.

Elyas’ treasure room lies beyond the
north arch. Light from its glowing domed
ceiling reflects off the polished marble
floor, brightening this room. There must
be thousands of gold pieces in the treasure
room, spilling from ornate chests!

The room through the south arch is
identical to the treasure room, but it is

empty.

 

 

 

If any characters passes through either of the
arches, a burst of light flashes in the archway
and they turn into platinum statues just like
the statues in areas 83 and 86. Victims do not
make saving throws.

The statue remains in the archway for only a
moment. Then the eastern doors swing open
by themselves. The statue PCs rise up and
float through the doors into an alcove in area
86.

When the witches are destroyed with the
Black Opal Eye as explained in area 100, all
the statues in areas 83 and 86 change back into
the people they were. You can run those peo-
ple as NPCs. They may or may not be friendly
to the PCs. If you choose not to run them as
NPCs, assume that they are so shaken by their
experience that they leave the tower immedi-
ately.

The Black Opal Eye is hanging from the
center of the the domed ceiling in the room to
the south, area 105. However, it is not visible
from area 87 because the archway between the
rooms is much lower than the ceiling in area
105.



This dark corridor is 30 feet long. A pair of
steel doors are in the east end, and a pair of
bronze doors are in the west end. The
north and south walls each contain a single
wooden door, reinforced with iron bands.
Those doors are directly across from one
another.

 

89. KARELENA’S BEDROOM

 

This is an extravagantly furnished bed-
room. A gilt framed bed stands in the mid-
dle of the room. Tapestries hang on all four
walls. A large wardrobe stands in the
southwest corner. A vanity and mirror sit
next to the wardrobe. Six small jars and a
large glass vial lie on top of the vanity. An
iron gate is set in the north end of the west
wall. The gate leads to an empty 10-foot-
square alcove. A 1-foot-long lever is
attached to the wall near the gate. A wom-
an’s wide-brimmed feathered hat hangs on
a peg near the lever.

 

 

 

The alcove is a teleporter to Elyas’ laboratory.
Anyone who puts on the hat and steps into the
alcove appears in the northern alcove in room
70. The hat reappears on the peg here. The
hat has no other magical power.

The lever raises and lowers the iron gate.
The lever is currently down. The lever cannot
be seen or reached by anyone in the alcove.
Karelena keeps the gate lowered when she is
in the room or when she is gone and will not
be using the teleporter for a while.

The tapestries, clothes, and jars have no real
value, but the vial contains a magical per-
fume. The charisma of any female character
who uses the perfume increases to 18 for 1d6
turns. The perfume has no other effects.

90. SOLORENA’S BEDROOM

The door to this room from area 88 is locked.

 

The walls and floor of this room are cov-
ered with rare and expensive carpets. Pil-
lows and cushions lie scattered around the
room. In the center of the room is a large
carpet with a phoenix embroidered on it.
A large pile of pillows sits in the southwest
corner of the room. An arch in the west
wall leads to a 10-foot-square alcove. Near
the alcove, a 1-foot-long lever projects
from the wall.

 

 

 


 

Solorena is asleep on the pile of pillows.
Remember that she is using the body of Sylva,
a willowy, golden-haired elf maiden.
Solorena’s powers are described in the Appen-
dix under New Monsters.

Solorena, Witch: AC 9; M1; hp 4; MV 120’
(40’); #AT 1; D 1d4; Save M1; ML6; ALC;
XP 10

Spells:

First Level: charm person, floating disk,
sleep

Solorena is carrying a Jevitate scroll, hidden in

her cape.

If the PCs wake her, Solorena tries to escape
through the secret door in the south wall.
That door is hidden behind a carpet and is
locked, but Solorena has its key. If she escapes,
she goes to area 105 to guard the Black Opal
Eye.

If she cannot escape, she pretends to be a
prisoner. If the PCs attack her, she fights back
and mentally summons her pet, an intelligent
black panther. The panther arrives 1d10
rounds later to defend her.

Black Panther: AC 4; HD 4; hp 14; MV
210’ (70'); #AT 3; D 1d4/1d4/1d8; Save
F2; ML 8; ALN; XP 75

The carpet with the phoenix design on it is of
very high quality and is worth 40 gp. It
weights 300 coin weight.

The alcove is a receiving area from the tele-
porter in Elyas’ Laboratory, area 70. The lever
controls an iron gate over the alcove. The lever
and the gate are up.

91. WINE TASTER

 

This room is 30 feet square. There is a pair
of bronze doors in the east wall. Lowered
steel portcullises block stairways leading
down from the centers of the north, south,
and west walls.

A huge statue of a tremendously fat
man sits cross-legged in the center of the
room. The statue’s chubby hands rest
upon its huge thighs. The statue’s open
mouth gapes at the ceiling in a permanent
smile. An engraved plaque is attached to
the base of the statue. It reads: “I judge by
taste”.

 

 

 

Each portcullis leads to one of three mazes,
area 92, 93, or 94. The statue is a magical wine
taster. Whenever wine is poured into its
mouth, it opens one of the portcullises. The

portcullis that is opened depends upon the
quality of the wine poured into the statue.
The better the wine poured into the taster, the
shorter and safer the maze.

Each type of wine found in the tower has a
serial number printed at the bottom of the
label. The last letter of that number indicates
which portcullis is opened. Thus, ‘Cham-
pagne du le Stomp” (last letter N) opens the
portcullis in the north wall. “Red Dragon
Crush” (last letter W) opens the west portcul-
lis. ‘‘Grapemash” (last letter S$) opens the
south portcullis. Any wine not found in the
tower is always judged as the inferior ‘‘Grape-
mash.”

92-94. TELEPORT MAZES

Areas 92, 93, and 94 are magical teleport maz-
es. Passing through any one of these mazes is
the only way to get to areas 96-103. All three
mazes work the same way, but maze 92 is
shorter than maze 93, which is shorter than
maze 94. These mazes are shaded on map 6.

Each lettered area in the mazes is a 10-foot-
square room surrounded by four 5-foot-
square alcoves. Open archways lead to the
alcoves. A number is carved into the floor in
each archway. The alcoves are numbered 1
through 4. The starting areas, marked A, only
lead to three alcoves, numbered 1 through 3.

The alcoves are magical teleports. Anything
that passes through the archways is instantly
teleported away. Only one archway in each
room leads to the next part of the maze, and
eventually out of the maze. The other arch-
ways lead to area 95, the arena.

If the PCs step through the correct combi-
nation of archways, they never have to fight
the monsters in room 95. The combinations
are written on the wine bottles found in the
tower. Each serial number is the safe sequence
of archways for one of the mazes. Those
sequences follow:

92. North Maze (Safe combination: 3132)

Archway #3 at 92A leads to 92B

Archway #1 at 92B leads to 92C

Archway #3 at 92C leads to 92D

Archway #2 at 92D leads to room 96, north
alcove.

93. West Maze (Safe combination: 331422)

Archway #3 at 93A leads to 93B
Archway #3 at 93B leads to 93C
Archway #1 at 93C leads to 93D
Archway #4 at 93D leads to 93E
Archway #2 at 93E leads to 93F



Archway #2 at 93F leads to room 96, middle
alcove.

94. South Maze (Safe
14231241)

combination:

Archway #1 at 94A leads to 94B

Archway #4 at 94B leads to 94C

Archway #2 at 94C leads to 94D

Archway #3 at 94D leads to 94E

Archway #1 at 94E leads to 94F

Archway #2 at 94F leads to 94G

Archway #4 at 94G leads to 94H

Archway #1 at 94H leads to room 96, south

alcove.

When the PCs enter 92A, 93A, or 94A, use
the following boxed description.

 

A short flight of stairs leads down to a 10-
foot-square room. Three archways open
from the room into 5-foot-square alcoves.
A number is carved into the floor in the
center of each archway. The archways are
numbered 1, 2, and 3. The alcoves are
empty and have no visible exits.

 

 

 

When the PCs enter any other lettered room
in areas 92, 93, or 94, use the following boxed
text.

 

You suddenly appear in a 10-foot-square
stone room. Open archways lead to four 5-
foot-square alcoves. Each archway is
marked with a number carved in the floor.
The alcoves are numbered 1, 2, 3, and 4.
The alcoves are empty and contain no visi-
ble exits.

 

 

 

The Arena
Use Map 7 for area 95.

95. ARENA

 

In a flash of white light, you appear on a
platform on one side of a large, circular
arena. Another platform, 60 feet away, ris-
es from the area’s soft dirt floor. A smooth
15-foot-tall wall surrounds the area.
Behind that wall, rows of empty stone
benches watch over the area.

 

 

 

The PCs appear on the southern platform. As
soon as any PC climbs onto the opposite plat-
form, that PC is teleported to area 91. The
portcullis the PC entered the maze through
remains open.


 

 

 

TABLE 4
ARENA OPPONENTS

From
Maze Arena Number Save XP
Area Monster Appearing AC HD MV #AT Damage As ML AL Value
A Skeletons 5 7 1 60’(20’) 1 1d6 Fi 12 Cc 10
B Ores 5 6 1 120’(40’) 1 1d6 Fi 8 GC 10
Cc Tarantella Spider 1 5 " 120’(40’) 1 1d8 + F2 8 N 125
D Zombies 8 8 2 90'(30’) 1 1d8 Fi 12 Cc 20
E Ogres 2 5 41 90'(30’) 1 1d10 F4 10 c 125
8 Panthers 2 4 4 210'(70’) 3 1d4/1d4/1d8 — F2 8 N 75
G Minotaurs 2 6 6 120’(40') 2 1d6/1d6 F6 12 c 275
H Green Dragon 1 1 or 90°(30’)/ 3+ 1d6/1d6/3d8 F8 9 Cc 1750

240'(80’) breath

 

When the PCs appear in this arena, mon-
sters also appear to fight the PCs and keep
them from reaching the north platform. The
type and number of monsters that appear
depends upon where the PCs stepped through
the wrong archway. Use Table 4 to determine
the monsters that appear in the arena. The
monsters disappear when they or their oppo-
nents are defeated.

The Inner Sanctu find Its secret through nearBy maGical ways
Use Map 8 for areas 96-100.
That have waited for many long years.
96. OUTER TEMPLE

 

You suddenly appear inside a 10-foot-
square alcove. An archway in the west wall
opens into a 30-foot-square room.

Two other identical alcoves are also set
into the east wall of the large room. Gold-
en doors stand in the centers of the north,
south, and west walls. In the center of the
room, a 15-foot-tall stone obelisk rests on a
short, stone pedestal. There are no mark-
ings on either the obelisk or the pedestal.
The high, domed ceiling is covered with a
fresco of a night sky. Many constellations

 

 

are marked on the fresco.

 

The alcoves are receiving points from the final
teleports in the teleport mazes, area 92, 93,
and 94.

When any question is asked in this room,
the obelisk speaks. Its deep, hollow voice fills
the room, saying, “answer me and I'll answer
thee in cruth, if but to questions three; What
is your name?”

If the character who asked the question
replies truthfully, the obelisk asks, “what is
your quest?”

If the same character gives a reasonably
accurate explanation of the PCs’ quest, the
obelisk asks, “‘do you know the first name of
the last creature you killed?” The true answer
to this question is almost always “No.” Once

the character passes this test, the obelisk
answers three, and only three, questions that
character asks it.

If asked how they can complete their quest,
the obelisk tells them:

 

 

“Beyond the three temples of the elements,

The Black dragon's eye walts for thee.

Beware the tricks Of old Elyas,
And return here with the Black opal eye, TO Give It power.
Then, s€t It In Its place and Behold
the end of Great sadness; the Beginning of Life;

the destruction of evil and the end of strife.”

 

The obelisk also knows the names of the three
temples, “Earth,” “Wind,” and “Fire,” but
only discloses them if asked about them
directly.

If the Black Opal Eye is brought into this
room, the point of the obelisk begins to glow.
There is a small depression at the top of the
obelisk where the Black Opal Eye can be
placed. Once the gem is placed there, a dim
spark appears within the gem, after which the
obelisk point ceases to glow. The gem is then
ready to be placed in the Dragon Throne in
room 100.



97. TEMPLE OF FIRE

 

This room’s ceiling arches 50 feet above the
stone floor. The ceiling and walls are cov-
ered with frescos depicting raging flames
and firestorms. At the west end of the
room an altar stands atop a platform.
Behind the altar, the life-size shape of a
human right hand is engraved into the
wall.

 

 

 


 

When any PC places his right hand into the
engraving, a deep, hollow voice speaks,
“Answer me and I'll answer thee. By what
name call ye these temples three?”

The correct answer is, “Earth, Wind, and
Fire.” If this answer, or one with the same
meaning (such as “Earth, Air, and Flame”) is
spoken, the secret door behind the hand
silently opens.

If a wrong answer is given, a column of fire
bursts from the ceiling, striking the PC whose
hand is in the engraving. This flame causes
2d4 points of damage, but only half damage if
the character makes a successful saving throw
vs. spells.

The flame strikes each time a PC answers
the question incorrectly. Answering the ques-
tion correctly is the only way to open the secret
door.

98. TEMPLE OF WIND

 

This room's arched ceiling is 50 feet high.
The walls and ceiling are covered with fres-
cos depicting racing clouds and trees bent
over under the force of a hurricane. At the
west end of the room an altar stands atop a
platform. Behind the altar, a life-size
shape of a human right hand is engraved in
the wall.

 

 

 

When any PC places his right hand into the
engraving, a deep, hollow voice speaks,
“Answer me and I'll answer thee. By what
name call ye these temples three?”

The correct answer is, “Earth, Wind, and
Fire.” If this answer, or one with the same
meaning (such as “Ground, Air, and Flame’’)
is spoken, the secret door behind the hand
silently opens.

If a wrong answer is given, a tornado forms
in this room. The tornado causes 1d4 points of
damage to everyone in the room during the
round after the wrong answer. The tornado
inflicts 1d8 points the next round, and gives
everyone 1d4 points of damage in the third
round. After the third round, the tornado dis-
appears. Each round, characters who make a
successful saving throw vs. spells only take half
damage.

The tornado forms every time a wrong
answer is given. Answering the question cor-
rectly is the only way to open the secret door.

99. TEMPLE OF EARTH

 

This room is 50 feet tall. Its arched ceiling
and walls are covered with frescos of great

 

 

 

 

mountains, canyons, and other rock for-
mations. At the front of the room an altar
stands atop a platform. Behind the altar,
the stone wall is shattered and fallen in.

 

 

 

If the PCs did not encounter Karelena in room
27, or if she escaped from them there, she is here
with a panther. She stands at the altar with her
back to the door. When she hears the PCs enter,
she orders the panther to attack. Then she tries
to escape. Remember she is using Merisa’s body.
A complete description of Karelena is in the
Appendix under New Monsters.

Karelena, Witch: AC 9; M1; hp 5; MV
120’ (40'); #AT 1; D 1d4; Save M1;
Morale 6; AL C; XP 10

Spells: (2 of the following)

First Level: shield, hold portal,
sleep

Black Panther: AC 4; HD 4; hp 14; MV
210’ (70'); #AT 3; D 1d4/1d4/1d8; Save
F2; Morale 8; AL N; XP 75

There is a small passageway in the rubble
behind the altar that halflings or dwarves can
crawl through. The PCs can open a passage
large enough for all the PCs, if they clear the
rubble for 1d6 turns. However, clearing the
rocks makes a great deal of noise. Check for a
random encounter every turn the PCs spend
enlarging the passage.

100. INNER SANCTUM

 

This circular room is 30 feet in diameter. Its
domed ceiling is 30 feet above the floor.
Three 10-foot-wide alcoves are set into the
north, west, and south walls. Three 20-foot-
tall stone statues stand in front of the alcoves
around a smaller statue in the center of the
room. All the statues are carved dragon heads
on long necks. Gems in the right eyes of the
southern and northem statues glow with dim
blue light. The gem in the right eye of the
western statue glows with a pulsing, bright
red light. The impression of a hand is carved
in the neck of each large dragon, within
reach of normal humans.

The neck of the smaller center statue is
hollowed out to form a niche. Within this
niche sits an iron throne.

A black stone is set in the smaller statue's
left eye socket. The right eye socket is empty.

 

 

 

Every female character who enters this room
with a charisma of 15 or more must make a

saving throw vs. spells. The first character who
fails her saving throw rushes to the western
statue and places her hand in the carving on
the statue’s neck. Other characters may try to
stop her if they react quickly.

As her fingers touch the carving, she and
the statue are bathed in red light and she falls
unconscious. After a few seconds she revives,
apparently unhurt. The gem then glows blue.
That character's spirit is now imprisoned with-
in the gern and her body is inhabited by the
spirit of the witch Trilena.

Trilena pretends to be the character whose
body she is using. Once Trilena is free, all the
witches’ power increases (see New Monsters).

Any male character or any female character
with charisma of less than 15 who places a
hand in the impression in the western statue
hears a mocking female voice say: ‘Fool!
Think ye that your feeble wits and strength
can overcome my powers?” Then a small
lightning bolt streaks down from the glowing
eye, giving the character 2d4 points of dam-
age.

Any PC who touches the hand carving in
the northern statue instantly communicates
telepathically with the imprisoned elf, Merisa.
Any PC who touches the hand carving in the
southern statue communicates telepathically
with Sylva. In both cases, the PC hears faint
cries for help and feels the pain and sadness of
the trapped spirit.

If Solorena’s hand is forced into the carving
in the southern statue, she becomes trapped
in the statue again and Sylva is set free. If
Karelena’s hand is forced into the carving in
the northern statue, she becomes trapped and
Merisa is freed. If the witches are imprisoned
in the statues, the color of the eye gems
changes from blue to red.

When the Black Opal Eye is purified by the
obelisk in room 96, and inserted in the right
eye socket of the small dragon, all three witch-
es are destroyed, no matter where they are.
The trapped spirits of Sylva and Merisa and
any spirit trapped by Trilena (see above) are
freed. In a flash of blue light, their bodies are
restored to full health, even if they were killed
while the witches were in them.

Anyone who steps into the northern alcove
is teleported to the platform in room 101.
Anyone who enters the southern alcove is tele-
ported to the platform in room 104. The west-
ern alcove is a receiving point from the
teleporters in rooms 103 and 106.

The iron throne looks exactly like the
throne in room 54. Anyone who sits in the
throne is instantly sent to the throne in room
54.


 

Elyas’ Treasury (Continued)
Use Map 6 for areas 101-106.

101. NORTH TREASURY
ENTRANCE

 

This is a 20-foot-square room. A semi-
circular platform stands against the wall
opposite a pair of steel double doors. The
doors are closed.

 

 

 

The doors open easily to room 102. The plat-
form is a receiving teleport from the northern
alcove teleport in room 100. Standing on the
platform here has no effect.

102. NORTH TREASURY

 

This room is a 40-foot-wide octagon. The
entire room is bathed in bright golden
light from the glowing ceiling, 50 feet
overhead. Ornate carvings cover the ceil-
ing. Both the east and west walls have a
pair of steel doors in them. Both pairs of
doors are closed. Set in the south wall is a
glowing silver arch, 20 feet wide. Some
words in an ancient script are carved above
the arch. Large treasure chests are scattered
across the highly polished floor. Some of
them are open and full of coins!

 

 

 

Anyone who passes through the glowing arch-
way turns into a platinum statue. See the
explanation of room 87 for details about the
archway and its effects.

The treasure chests contain 4,000 cp, 3,000
sp, 1,500 ep, 5,000 gp, 500 pp, 3 100-gp
gems, and 10 50-gp gems, as well as a potion
of gaseous form, and a scroll of read languages
and levitate.

PCs have a 40% chance to read the ancient
script as:

 

“Once the portal is crossed,
Make no mistake,
A part of my treasury you will make.”

 

103. NORTH TREASURY EXIT

 

This room is 20 feet square. Ornate steel
doors in the west wall face a semi-circular

 

 

platform against the east wall.

 

Anyone who stands upon the platform is
instantly teleported to the western alcove in
room 100.

104. SOUTH TREASURY
ENTRANCE

 

This is a 20-foot-square room. A semi-
circular platform stands against the wall
opposite a pair of steel double doors. The
doors are closed.

 

 

 

The doors open easily to room 105. The plat-
form is a receiving teleport from the southern
alcove teleport in room 100. Standing on the
platform here has no effect.

105. SOUTH TREASURY

 

This room is an octagon, 40 feet across.
Both the east and west walls have a pair of
steel doors in them. Both pairs of doors are
closed. A glowing silver arch, 20 feet wide,
is set in the south wall. Some words in an
ancient script are carved above the arch.
The entire room is lit by bright golden
light from the ceiling, 50 feet overhead.
The ceiling is covered with decorative carv-
ings. A large gem in a setting hangs from
the end of a chain suspended from the cen-
ter of the ceiling.

 

 

 

The words are the same as in room 102. The
gem is the Black Opal Eye. It is hanging in a
setting at the end of a 10-foot-long chain, 40
feet above the floor (which is why it is not visi-
ble from area 87).

There are many ways the PCs can reach the
opal. If they use any of the following three
methods, they automatically succeed. You
must decide if any other method they use
works. First, a thief can safely climb the walls
and go across the ceiling, using ropes to
anchor himself to the carvings. The carvings
are solid enough to support a character's
weight. Second, if the PCs throw any kind of
gtappling hook it will snag on one of the carv-
ings in the ceiling. Then they can climb a rope
from the grappling hook to the gem. Third, a
magic-user can cast a levitate spell to rise to
the opal. Once a PC reaches the opal, it is easi-
ly pried out of its setting.

Anyone who passes through the glowing
archway turns into a platinum statue. See the
explanation for room 87 for details about the
archway and its effects.



106. SOUTH TREASURY EXIT

 

This room is 20 feet square. Against the
east wall is a large semi-circular platform.
A pair of steel doors is in the west wall. The
doors are closed.

 

 

 

Anyone who steps upon the platform instant-
ly teleports to the western alcove in room 100.

Aftermath

The adventure ends when the player charac-
ters have rescued Hasan, recovered the trea-
sure, captured or driven off the Rahib, and
banished the witch sisters. Although the char-
acters are expected to turn over Rahasia’s trea-
sure, they may keep Elyas’ hoard and
anything else they find. If the adventure suc-
ceeds, Rahasia and Hasan will be wed amidst
much celebration and the characters will be
treated as honored guests. If many elves have
been slain, the celebration will be much sub-
dued and the feelings towards the player char-
acters will be mixed. The characters can fulfill
their word to Sindar by delivering Merisa’s
package to Rahasia.

 


APPENDIX

NEW MAGICAL ITEMS

RAHASIA’S PENDANT

Generations ago, the mage Elyas created a tal-
isman of power over evil magic. He gave it to
the elves, who passed it from generation to
generation until it came to Rahasia’s father.

The talisman is made of two parts, a golden
pendant and a black jade ring. A black jade
stone is set in the pendent, which is worth
1,300 gp alone. There is a flat golden space
with an uneven circular indentation the size of
a ring on the back of the pendant. Also, these
verses are inscribed on the back of the pen-
dant:

stone Of power/stone Of BRIGHT
GIVING MeEn/theiR Rays Of LiGht
forces dark/will thou make small
weak’ning men/of night's dark call
PUTLING RING/INTO the Back
VENGEANCE GIvE/to those in Black

The ring exactly matches the impression in the
pendant. When the ring is pressed into the
impression, there is a bright flash of light as
the two become the talisman.

When the ring and pendant are joined, the
writing on the back of the pendant changes to
the single word “RAHASIA.” When the
holder of the talisman says “RAHASIA,” an
invisible 30-foot-radius circle of power is cre-
ated. No evil magic works in this circle,
including the Rahib’s curse. Spells cast by evil
beings in the circle automatically fail, but
existing spell effects and permanent items
used by evil beings still work outside the cir-
cle. The circle does not affect the bone golem
or the water weird. The circle of power lasts 10
rounds. It moves with the talisman. The talis-
man will work only three times, after which
the ring and pendant separate and become
non-magical.

THE BLACK OPAL EYE

The Black Opal Eye is a stone of great magical
power, usable only by those who know its
secret. The three witches draw power from it
and will increase in power if all of them are
freed. They do not need to possess the opal,
but only need to know where it is in order to
use it. The witches will not be able to use 2nd
and 3rd level spells if the stone is stolen and
they do not know where it is.

Elyas planned to use the Black Opal Eye's
power to destroy the witches, but was killed
before he could do so. To destroy the witches,
the PCs must place the opal on the obelisk in
room 96, then place the gem in the Dragon
Throne in room 100. If they do this, the fol-
lowing happens:

1. The spirits of the three witches are perma-
nently locked within the gem eyes of the
larger dragons.

2. The spirits of the witches’ victims return
to their original bodies.

3. The three large dragon heads crumble
away, and the eyes are banished forever to
an unknown dimension.

4, All the adventurers transformed into
platinum statues are restored to normal.
The PCs may not have rescued all the
prisoners (the elves Hasan, Merisa, Sylva,
and Miryala; the magician Merdiz; and
the fighter Baik Telor), The adventurers
who were platinum statues rescue anyone
the PCs don’t.

5. The Black Opal Eye shatters into dust.

6. If the Rahib is still alive and free, he flees
from the elven forest forever.

INTERLUDE G

After delivering Sindar’s package in the elven
village the party returns to the Duke's road
brings them to Selenica. As the western end of
a trade route that crosses the Altan Tepe
Mountains and the vast sandy Alasiyan Desert
to the cast, its crowded streets have vendors
selling many wares that are rarely seen in the
Grand Duchy. The streets are strange and con-
fusing, and in trying to follow Sindar’s direc-
tions the party becomes hopelessly lost.
Finally, they manage to discover Arnulf’s
dwelling, an expensive mansion in the Mer-
chants’ Quarter. A new problem arises. They
are met at the door by Praxes, a snobbish ser-
vant of Arnulf. He looks at the dusty and
travel-stained adventurers and is convinced
they could not possibly have anything to give
his master. Encourage the players to role-play
their attempts to get Arnulf’s whereabouts
from the haughty servant. Among things that
will work: a) a bribe of 100 gp or more; b) tak-
ing rooms somewhere, cleaning up, and pre-
senting themselves in new and expensive
clothing; or c) any device that impresses you as
‘Trying to get the information elsewhere will
reveal only that he “left town” secretly, as he
often does and that he is probably off trading
somewhere. Asking for information about

ee
3

Once mounted for desert travel, the charac-
ters have no trouble catching Arnulf’s caravan.
Arnulf is delighted with Sindar’s gift, a magi-

healthy bonus if the trading is good
Whether they accept or not, a day or two
later they will be caught in a , and


 

 

Design: Tom Moldvay

Editing: Harold Johnson, Jon Pickens

Art: Jim Holloway, Harry Quinn, Stephen D.
Sullivan

Playtesting: Dave Cook, Helen Cook, Clint
Johnson, Steve Kaszar, Bill Wilkerson, Jeff
Wyndham, and The Kent State University
Gamer's Guild

Special Thanks: To Jon Pickens for his invalu-
able assistance

General Notes: In its original form, this
adventure had a fully detailed five-tier pyra-
mid, an outline of a second five tiers, and a
map to the lost city. The concept was to
encourage the DM to expand the latter sec-
tions into a full blown campaign. The upper
pyramid levels were selected for inclusion in
this collection.

AINE: iat aya stctin craters eta kel gl 151-153

 

Players’ Background

Days ago, your group of adventurers joined a
desert caravan. Halfway across the desert, a
terrible sandstorm struck, separating your par-
ty from the rest of the caravan. When the
storm died down, you found you were alone.
The caravan was nowhere in sight. The desert
was unrecognizable, as the dunes had been
blown into new patterns. You were lost.

You headed east, the same way the caravan
was headed before the storm. Days passed.
Your mounts died and you soon drank the last
of your water. The end of the desert was not in
sight.

The second day after your water ran out,
you stumbled upon a number of stone blocks
sticking out of sand dune. Investigation
showed that the sand covered the remains of a
tall stone wall. On the other side of the stone
wall was a ruined city.

The stone blocks of the city had toppled
and cracked with the passing of time. Sand
had covered most of the buildings. The stones
that remained uncovered had been scoured
smooth by the blowing sands.

In the center of the city towered a step-
pyramid. It had five step-like tiers, each 20’
high. The bottom-most tier was almost com-
pletely covered with sand. On top of the high-
est tier were three 30’ tall statues.

The statue on the left was of a strong,
bearded man holding a balance in one hand
and a lightning bolt in the other. The middle
statue was of a winged child with two snakes
twined about its body. The child held a wand
in one hand and a handful of coins in the oth-
er. The statue on the right was of a beautiful
woman. In her hands she held a sheaf of wheat
and a sword.

On the south side of the pyramid, a ramp
with stairs led from the ground to the top of
the highest tier. A quick search of the ruins
revealed no source of food or water, so you
decided to climb the pyramid. In the side of
the ramp, level with the floor of the top tier,
you found a secret door... .

DM’s Background

Centuries ago, Cynidicea was the capital of a
rich and fertile kingdom. Its people reclaimed
much land from the desert, especially during
the reign of King Alexander—the last and
greatest king of Cynidicea. Upon King Alex-
ander’s death, a huge pyramid was raised in
his honor. This pyramid was the largest and
most important building in the city.

The fall of Cynidicea began on the day that
workers, digging under the great pyramid,



chanced upon the lair of a strange monster
called Zargon. Zargon was roughly humanoid
in shape, though larger than most humans. In
place of arms and legs it had twelve tentacles.
Its head was that of a giant lizard, with a large
black horn in the middle of its forehead.

Zargon killed most of the workers, then
began hunting prey at night through the
streets of Cynidicea. The city guard was not
able to kill the monster. At last, the city rulers
began sending criminals from the jails into
the pyramid for Zargon to feed on.

In time, a strange cult arose that wor-
shipped the monster as a god. The cult viewed
the monster's victims as religious sacrifices.
The worship of the Immortal patrons of Cyn-
dicea —Gorm, Usamigaras, and Madarua—
was forsaken in favor of the worship of the
monster Zargon. Finally, most of the citizens
of Cynidicea worshipped it.

The worshippers of Zargon began to look
for strange pleasures. They sought oblivion in
rare wines and bizarre drugs. Workers no long-
er repaired the irrigation ditches. Rich land
turned into desert. The army lost its disci-
pline. People outside the city rebelled, or
moved away as chaos spread outward from
Cynidicea.

Later, barbarian warriors stormed over the
walls and destroyed the city. The only people
of Cynidicea who survived its destruction were
those who had fled underground to the vast
catacombs under the city. There, led by Priests
of Zargon, the Cynidiceans tried to rebuild
the city.

The surviving people based their new life
around a huge underground lake fed by chan-
nels cut through solid rock. Built in the reign
of King Alexander, the lake had been the
original city’s water supply. On its shores, the
people grew mushrooms and other edible
fungi. They built houses using stones from
the ruins above. The new underground city
was much smaller than the ancient capital,
but it was safer because it was hidden beneath
the desert sands. Above, drifting sands cov-
ered the original city, and Cynidicea was lost
in the vastness of the desert.

The Cynidiceans
Generation after generation of Cynidiceans
have lived out their lives underground.
Though still human, their skin has become
very pale and their hair is bone-white. The
Cynidiceans have developed infravision and,
like goblins, attack with a penalty of — 1 to hit
when fighting in full daylight.

Every Cynidicean wears a stylized mask,
usually of an animal or human face. Some are


 

made of wood, some of paper maché, and
some of metal. Most Cynidiceans wear fancy
clothes, flashy jewelry, and carry short swords.
Some paint their bodies with bright colors.

The Cynidiceans are a dying race. Each new
generation is smaller than the last. Most Cyni-
diceans have forgotten that an outside world
exists, living most of their lives in weird
dreams. The times when they seem normal,
tending their fields and animals, are becom-
ing fewer and fewer as the dreams replace real-
ity. Their unusual costumes and masks only
strengthen their dream worlds. Typical Cyni-
dicean encounters are given in the New Mon-
ster section.

Factions of Cynidicea

A few Cynidiceans are nearly normal. These
Cynidiceans are trying to restore the worship
of the old Immortals—Gorm, Usamigaras,
and Madarua. They hope to stop the slow
death of their society and regain the past glory
of Cynidicea.

The Brotherhood of Gorm. Their Immor-
tal, Gorm, rules war, storms, and justice. The
followers of Gorm are male fighters of Lawful
alignment. All wear golden masks of the face
of Gorm, a long-haired, bearded man with a
stern gaze. Each Brother also wears iron chain
mail over a blue tunic. Under the armor, each
has a small blue lightning bolt tattooed on his
right shoulder. The Brothers believe in justice
tempered by mercy. They worship Gorm on
the fourth day of each week and consider
lightning storms to be holy.

The Magi of Usamigaras. This faction wor-
ships Usamigaras, ruler of healing, messen-
gers, and thieves. They are all Neutral
magic-users, wearing silver masks of the face
of Usamigaras, the smiling child. The Magi
also carry silver daggers and wear rainbow-
colored robes.

The right palm of each is marked with small
silver lines in the shape of a five-pointed star.
The Magi are usually friendly toward clerics,
thieves, elves, and magic-users, but look
down upon fighters, dwarves, and halflings.
Usamigaras is worshipped on certain days
when the heavenly stars and planets are in the
right patterns. The Magi record the positions
of the stars and planets so that they will know
when their holy days are.

The Warrior Maidens of Madarua. The
Maidens worship Madarua, ruler of birth,
death, and the changing seasons. They are
Neutral female fighters. The Warrior Maidens
wear bronze masks of Madarua, a beautiful
woman. They also wear bronze chain mail
armor over green tunics. Each Maiden has a

small, sickle-shaped scar on the inside of her
left wrist. Madarua has a special holy day at
the beginning of each of the four seasons.

The three factions do not get along well.
Each faction is sure that only its members
know the proper way to restore the lost great-
ness of Cynidicea. Often, when members of
different factions meet, they argue or fight. It
is possible for the three factions to cooperate,
but such cooperation is rare.

The bickering between the three factions,
and their attempts to restore sanity to Cynidi-
cean society, give the DM the chance to add
character interaction to the adventure. While
the factions can be played as simple monsters
with treasure, the DM and players can have a
lot of fun with the plots and feuding of the
factions. If this is done, the DM should plan
in advance what the faction members may say
or do if the party tries to talk, attack, or wait to
see what the NPCs do first. It is important for
the DM to avoid forcing the action to a pre-set
conclusion—the actions of the players must be
able to make a difference.

If the player characters join one of the fac-
tions, it will be easier for them to get supplies
and rest between adventures. All the factions
may accept player characters as members.

The Brotherhood of Gorm will take male
fighters, male dwarves, male halflings, and
male elves as full members. The Magi of
Usamigaras will take any magic-user, elf, cler-
ic, or thief. The Warrior Maidens will take
female fighters, female elves, female dwarves,
and female halflings as full members. Also,
any character may become a lesser member of
a faction, if desired. Factions will not do as
much for lesser members, and a lesser mem-
ber can never become powerful within a fac-
tion. The DM should decide how much a
faction will do for its members.

The Priests of Zargon are a fourth faction.
They are found mainly in areas outside the
basic adventure. The Priests of Zargon serve
the evil monster Zargon and control the
underground city.

TIERS 1 AND 2
(Dungeon Level 1)

The pyramid is made of large, smooth stone
blocks. The rooms are made of bare stone
slabs, except where noted otherwise. Passage
ceilings are usually 10’ high. Room ceilings
are 15’ high. Most doors will be stone slabs
that push inward to open. Doors will tend to
close unless held, jammed, or spiked open.
Unless otherwise stated, the pyramid will be
unlit.



Remember that the characters are out of
food and water. They must have these supplies
soon or they will die. In your descriptions,
keep reminding the party that they are hun-
gty, thirsty, and tired. This will help the play-
ers role play.

Wandering Monsters

Wandering monsters are encountered on a roll
of 1 on 1d6. Check for wandering monsters
once every 2 game turns. Roll 1d8 on the Wan-
dering Monster Table: Level 1 table for the
monster encountered, or choose one.

Giant Locust. Giant locusts are 3’ long gray
grasshoppers. They are immune to poison and
yellow mold. If disturbed, giant locusts will
panic and jump up to 60’ in a random direc-
tion (50% chance to jump toward the party.)
Anyone hit by a jumping locust takes 1-4
points of damage. Giant locusts may bite for
1-2 points of damage. They also shriek when
frightened, having a 20% chance to attract
wandering monsters. If cornered, a giant
locust will spit a brown goo up to 10’ (any tar-
get is AC 9 for this). A character hit by the goo
must save vs. Poison or be too sick to do any-
thing for 1 turn. Other characters coming
within 5’ of the victim must save vs. Poison or
also become violently ill for a turn. The victim
has this effect until the goo is washed off.

Cynidicean. Cynidiceans live underground
in the Lost City. They are pale-skinned, white-
haired humans with large eyes and infravis-
ion. Cynidiceans wear masks and brightly
colored robes. They will be acting out strange
dreams when encountered (see the DM’s
Background information). A dozen Cynidi-
cean encounters, usable for all dungeon
levels, are given under Cynidiceans in the
monster section. The DM may use these
encounters or make up his or her own.

Ferret, Giant. Giant ferrets look like 3’ long
weasels. They hunt giant rats underground.
Ferrets are highly unpredictable and some-
times attack humans.

Gnome. These gnomes have traveled
underground to the Lost City through the
tunnels and canals that empty into the under-
ground lake that lies near the underground
city map.

Goblin. The goblins live in caves across the
underground lake from the Cynicideans. The
goblins serve Zargon. If no Cynidiceans vol-
unteer to go to Zargon, the goblins kidnap
victims to feed the monster. Otherwise, the
goblins do not usually harm Cynidiceans.
After all, if the Cynidiceans died out, Zargon
would start eating goblins!


 

KEY TO TIER 1
1, STATUE ROOM

 

The slab of stone that hid the secret
entrance to the pyramid is now held open
by the dead body of a hobgoblin. The
body has a large crossbow bolt sunk deep
in its chest. The hobgoblin has been dead
several weeks.

 

 

 

There is nothing of interest around the body,
and all its equipment has been taken. Beyond
the stone slab is a 10’ wide passage, leading
into the pyramid. The passage floor is covered
with dust. Several pairs of footprints can be
seen leading inward. In a niche in the wall
opposite the secret door, the party will see a
large crossbow (la) pointed at them. The
crossbow is not loaded. The crossbow trap was
triggered by a hidden pressure plate in the
floor just inside the secret door. The hobgob-
lin stepped on the plate, springing the trap.
The secret door to the pyramid will swing shut
behind the party unless they jam it open. It
can be forced open normally.

 

The highest tier of the pyramid is a single
40' square room. The room smells old and
musty. The dust on the floor has been dis-
turbed, though no special details can be
made out. Three huge bronze cylinders
reach from the floor to the ceiling in the
middle of the room. In the center of each
cylinder, facing you at floor level, is a
bronze door. Each door has a bronze han-
dle that can be used to pull the door open.

 

 

 

DM Note on Traps: Normally the characters
won't find traps unless they are looking for
them. Traps that work automatically can be
avoided by taking special precautions. The
DM rolls the dice whenever characters are
looking for (or thieves are removing) traps.
More information on traps can be found in the
D&D Basic rules.

Trap 1b. The door to the room, as usual, will
swing shut unless held or jammed open. In
each corner of the room are small holes that
release gas into the room. The gas trap is trig-
gered by opening the door. The gas is odor-
less, tasteless, and invisible. An elf or thief has
a 50% chance to hear the hiss of escaping gas.

The gas will take one round to build up in
the closed room before doing any damage.
During this round the characters will feel a lit-
tle dizzy. Each round after the first, the gas
does 1 point of damage. When they start tak-

ing damage, the party will realize it is getting
hard to breathe. Rags or iron spikes jammed
into the holes will stop the gas from filling the
room. If both the room's door and the secret
door are jammed open, the gas will escape
without harming the party.

The bronze cylinders are actually the hollow
bases of the statues of the Cynidicean Immor-
tals on top of the pyramid. The cylinders will
sound hollow if tapped. The doors into the
cylinders are also trapped (1c, 1d, and le).

Trap Ic is in the west wall next to the base of
the left statue (Gorm). Four darts will fire out
of the wall when the door’s handle is pulled.
The darts can only hit someone standing
directly in front of the door. Roll to hit as if
each dart was fired by a 1 HD monster. Each
dart that hits does 1-3 points of damage.

Trap id in the base of the center statue
(Usamigaras) is harmless. If the party searches
this area, they will find dried blood in front of
the cylinder. The trap was triggered by an ear-
lier party. (Normally, two spears would shoot
out when the door is opened. Each attack
would be rolled as if a 1 HD monster was
throwing the spears at characters standing
directly in front of the door. Each character hit
would take 1-6 points of damage. The DM
may have this trap reset if the party leaves and
comes back.)

Trap le is a special hinged paving stone in
front of the base of the right statue (Mada-
rua). The stone will drop open when the door
handle is pulled. Anyone standing in front of
the door will fall to room 6 below and take 1-6
points of damage.

The bronze cylinders are hollow. A ladder
going both up and down will be found inside
each cylinder. Anyone climbing up a ladder
will find that it goes up inside one of the
statues on top of the pyramid. Each statue has
a special speaking tube which allowed its
priests to speak the Immortal’s will. The char-
acter will also see a number of levers. These
levers can be used to move parts of the statue
(arms, head, eyes, and so on). A character
climbing down any ladder will enter room 6.

KEY TO TIER 2
2. STORAGE ROOM

 

This room contains rotting bales of what
might be cloth, and dusty crates. The
room smells like it has been closed off for a
long time.

 

 

 

The room is an old storage room that has long
been abandoned. The food once in the crates,
and the clothing once in the bales, is now rot-
ted and worthless. Otherwise, the room is

empty.
3. SECRET ROOM

 

Inside this room you see seven birdlike
creatures with long beaks like tubes. A
faint glitter catches your eye from the cen-
ter of the room as the birdlike creatures fly
toward you.

 

 

 

The attacking birdlike creatures are stirges
(AC 7; HD 1*; hp 4 each; MV 60’; #AT 1 at
+2; D 1-3; Save Fl; ML 9; AL N). A flying
stirge gains a bonus of +2 to hit due to its
speed.

Once a stirge’s attack hits, its beak attaches
to the victim, The stirge sucks blood for an
automatic 1-3 points of damage every round
until either the victim or the stirge is dead.

The glitter comes from four gems lying in a
pile of dust. The gems are worth 100 gp, 100
gp, 500 gp, and 1000 gp. The room also has a
small hole high in the north wall. The stirges
fly through the hole when they go out hunt-
ing at night.

4, PRIEST’S QUARTERS

 

The room is sparsely furnished with rotting
furniture. This includes a bed, a desk, a
chest, a writing table with wooden chair,
and a wooden holy symbol shaped like a
lightning bolt. All of the furniture is cov-
ered with a thick layer of dust. On the floor
lies the body of a dead hobgoblin. The
body looks several weeks dead. Its left arm
is swollen and discolored.

 

 

 

This room was once the quarters of a high
priest of the Brotherhood of Gorm. The hob-
goblin was killed by a giant bee from room 7.
His body has a full water bottle and a purse
with 135 sp and 40 gp in it. Otherwise the
room is empty.

5. FIREWORKS STOREROOM

 

This room seems drier than the rest of the
pyramid. In the center of the room are a
half dozen small crates. Seated on the
crates are nearly a dozen 1’ tall winged
people. They are talking a strange musical
language and laughing merrily.

 

 

 


These small winged people are sprites (AC 5;
HD 1/2; hp 3 each; MV 20’, fly 60’; #AT 1
spell; D special; Save E1; ML 7; ALN). There
are 10 of them. They will be friendly and chat-
ter merrily if approached in a friendly manner.
They are interested in everything, but nothing
holds their attention long. They will not join
the party, but the DM may use them to hint
about what lies ahead. If attacked, five sprites
acting together can cast one curse spell. The
curse will take the form of a magical practical
joke (like suddenly making a fighter’s armor
turn into a pile of rust, or gluing a character's
boots to the floor). The sprites will cast one or
two curses, then fly away through a 1’ x 1’
concealed door high in the northeast wall. If
pursued, they will try to escape by flying over
the green slime in room 8.

The crates contain fireworks packed in saw-
dust. There is only a 1 in 6 chance that a crate
of fireworks is still usable after all this time.
Any usable crate of fireworks is worth 100 gp
resale value. The ancient priests of Cynidicea
used the fireworks to help fake “miracles.” If
the players decide to keep the fireworks, a usa-
ble crate contains 1-6 charges of flash powder,
2-8 roman candles, 1-4 skyrockets, and 3-12
strings of small firecrackers. The DM should
only allow these firecrackers to make a lot of
smoke, bright lights, and noise. The firecrack-
ers should not do any damage or cause blind-
ness.

5a. POTTERY JARS

These three pottery jars are 4’ tall. The first
contains sand. The others, which used to store
water, are now dry and empty. The contents of
the jars were to be used if a fire broke out in
the fireworks room.

6. SPECIAL STOREROOM

 

A 10' radius circle at the foot of each ladder
is lit by a glowing, 2’ long beetle. Each
beetle has three glowing spots.

 

 

 

The three beetles are fire beetles (AC 4; HD
1+2; hp 6 each; MV 40’; #AT 1; D 2-8; Save
F1; ML7; ALN). Each beetle has three glands
that glow and give off light for a 10’ radius.
The glands will continue to glow for 1-6 days
after they are removed. The beetles are hun-
gry and will attack if disturbed.

This room holds spare parts for the machin-
ery inside the statues. There are also several
large, covered, clay pots. These pots held oil
to lubricate the machinery. The oil has almost
evaporated over the centuries, even through
though the pots were sealed. The party can

recover 5 flasks of oil that will burn poorly and
make thick clouds of smoke if lit. It will take 2
turns to recover all the oil. There is also a small
foundry here for fixing broken statue parts. It
has a forge, an anvil, tongs, hammers, and so
on.

7. TREASURE ROOM

cold. It dissolves wood and metal in 6 rounds.
If it touches flesh, it will turn the victim to
green slime in 1-4 rounds after the first 6
rounds. Green slime can be burned off, but
this does 1/2 damage to the slime and 1/2
damage to the character.

9. ABANDONED PRIEST’S QUARTERS

 

In the center of the room you see a 10’ tall
cage. In the bottom of the cage is a pile of
coins and gems. Hanging from the top of
the cage is a giant beehive. Several large, 1’
long bees are buzzing around the room.
The mesh of the cage is wide enough for
them to fly through. There is also a 1’
square hole high in the south wall.

 

 

 

The locked cage holds the treasure of the
Brotherhood of Gorm (rooms 11 and 12). The
treasure is guarded by 5 giant bees (AC 7; HD
1/2*; hp 2 each; MV 50’; #AT 1; D 1-3 + spe-
cial; Save Fl; ML 9; AL N) flying around the
room. The giant bees have learned that per-
sons wearing a mask of Gorm are friendly.
They will not attack anyone wearing the mask
of Gorm unless attacked first.

The giant bees will automatically attack any
other persons who go into the room. If the bee
attack is successful, the stung victim must save
ys. Poison or die. The bee will die after sting-
ing. Even characters who save must take 1
round to remove the stinger. Otherwise the
stinger will continue to work its way into the
victim doing 1 point of damage per round.

The treasure lying on the bottom of the
cage is 2000 sp, 500 gp, 2 gems each worth
100 gp and one piece of jewelry worth 700 gp.

The bees inside the hive will not attack the
party unless the hive itself is attacked. Inside
the hive are 4 more bees with 1 hit die each
(4hp), and a 2 hit die queen bee (9 hp). The
queen, unlike all other giant bees, can sting
repeatedly without dying. A special kind of
honey is found inside the beehive. If eaten,
the honey acts as one half-strength potion of
healing, curing 1-4 points of damage. All the
honey in the hive is needed to cure one charac-
ter of 1-4 points of damage.

8. ABANDONED ROOM

 

The entire floor of this room is covered
with green, oozing slime. Otherwise the
room appears to be empty.

 

 

 

The green oozing slime (AC n/a; HD 2*; hp
9; MV 1'; #AT 1; D special; Save Fl; ML 12;
ALN). Green slime can only be hurt by fire or



The room contains an old bed, writing
table, chair, and a chest. From the looks of
the furniture, the quarters have been long
abandoned. From behind the bed comes
scuffling sounds. Suddenly you see the
head of a large, pale blue lizard with
orange spots burst suddenly into view.

 

 

 

The lizard is a Gecko (AC 5; HD 3 +1; hp 15;
MV 40’; #AT 1; D 1-8; Save F2; AL N). It is
munching on the body of an unfortunate
Cynidicean. If the party enters the room with-
out looking up, they will be surprised by a sec-
ond Gecko that drops down from the ceiling
(hp 12). The mask worn by the Cynidicean is
of some birdlike creature. It is inlaid with gold
and worth 80 gp.

10. ABANDONED PRIEST’S QUARTERS

 

This room might once have been the quar-
ters of a cleric, but it looks like it has been
abandoned for a long time. It contains
musty, dust-covered furniture; a sleeping
pallet, a writing desk with a wooden stool,
a chest, and a wooden holy symbol that
looks like a balance.

 

 

 

The room holds nothing valuable.
11. BROTHERHOOD OF GORM

 

The room contains three double bunk
beds. Five men are seated on the lower
bunks talking. Each man wears iron chain
mail over a blue tunic. All wear steel hel-
mets, and each man's face is covered by a
golden mask. All their masks are the same.
They show a long-haired, bearded man
with a stern gaze.

 

 

 

The five men belong to the Brotherhood of
Gorm (AC 5; F1; hp 5 each; MV 20’; #AT 1; D
1-8; Save F1; ML 8; AL L). The Brotherhood
of Gorm controls rooms 11, 12, and 24.

If the party does not attack, the men may
ask them to join the Brotherhood. The DM
may decide this or roll 2d6. A roll of 9-12
means the party will be asked to join. A roll of
6-8 means the party members may join, but


 

will not be asked. A roll of 2-5 means the
Brothers will assume the characters are thieves
or spies and attack or drive them away. Only
male fighters, dwarves, halflings, and elves of
Lawful alignment may become full members,
but any character may become a lesser mem-
ber. Characters who want to join the Brother-
hood will be taken to room 12.

If fighting starts, the Brothers of Gorm in
room 12 will hear the fighting and rush to
help their fellow Brothers.

This room contains the Brothers’ equip-
ment, including food and water. The only
treasure is the Brothers’ masks, which are
worth 100 gp each.

lla. STATUE OF GORM

 

At the end of the corridor you see a glitter-
ing statue. The statue appears to be a
smaller version of the bearded man wield-
ing a lightning bolt you saw on top of the
pyramid.

 

 

 

The statue may appear at first to be made of
gold. Actually it is a wooden statue painted
with golden paint. It is man-sized and firmly
set into a heavy stone base. This statue of
Gorm has no gp value.

12. GRAND MASTER OF THE
BROTHERHOOD OF GORM

 

The room has three double bunk beds
along the walls. Six men stand around the
room talking. All wear chain mail armor
over blue tunics. Each man also wears a
steel helmet and a golden mask. The
masks look like a long-haired, bearded
man with a stern gaze.

 

 

 

Five of the men are Brothers of Gorm (AC 5;
F1; hp 5 each; MV 20’; #AT 1; D 1-8; Save F1;
ML 8; ALL). The tallest, oldest man is Kana-
dius, the Grand Master of the Brotherhood of
Gorm (AC 4; F3; hp 25; #AT 1 at +1; D 1-
8 +1; Save F3; ALL; $ 14,112, W9,D12,C
10, Ch 12). He wears a fancier helmet. He also
gives all Brothers a morale of 9 when they are
with him.

Kanadius is stern-looking but basically
kindly. He prefers to out-maneuver oppo-
nents, but is brave if fighting is necessary. He
is somewhat absent-minded with unimport-
ant details, but not with major ones. He leads
his men rather than orders them. Under his
leadership, morale is high.

If the party attacks: the Brothers in room 11
will rush to the aid of their fellow Brothers.

There is a secret trapdoor behind one of the
beds in the southeast corner of the room. If
the party attacks and is winning, Kanadius
may try to escape through this door. It leads
down into the secret chamber next to room 24
on Tier 3. Unless their morale fails, the Broth-
ers will fight to help Kanadius escape.

If Kanadius is attacked and escapes, the
DM may create a special encounter for later in
the adventure. The encounter would be with
Kanadius and a dozen Brothers of Gorm who
try to revenge their fellows. The special
encounter would replace a wandering monster
encounter, or it could happen at some place
the DM chooses.

This area contains the equipment of the
Brothers, including food and water. The
Brothers’ masks are worth 100 gp and Kana-
dius’ fancy helmet is a helm of telepathy, usa-
ble three times each day.

If the party does not attack: the Brothers in
this room may ask them to join (see room 11).
This happens if the DM rolls a 9-12 on 2d6. If
this is the first time the party has met the
Brothers, the Brothers may become suspicious
and attack (a 2d6 roll of 2-5). They stay neu-
tral on a roll of 6-8.

Before any characters actually join, Kana-
dius will secretly test their sincerity with the
helm of telepathy. As DM, ask the player
whether his or her character is sincere. Make it
clear that you, as DM, may forbid the charac-
ter to take certain actions later that go against
what the player decides now. Then ask for the
player's decision.

Only male fighters, dwarves, halflings, and
elves of Lawful alignment may become full
members of the Brotherhood of Gorm. They
will be taken to room 24 on Tier 3 for a simple
initiation ceremony run by Kanadius. Other
characters, if accepted as lesser members, will
be given a necklace with a small golden mask
of Gorm attached (worth 20 gp).

Regular members will be given tunics,
masks, and any normal armor or weapons they
might need. The Brotherhood has another
stronghold deep in the underground city.
Extra masks and necklaces are stored there. It
will take about half a day for a messenger to go
to the stronghold and return with extra masks
and necklaces. While the party waits, the
Brothers of Gorm will aid the party against
wandering monsters. The DM may also treat
the Brotherhood’s rooms as “safe” (free from
wandering monsters). The party can rest,
rememorize spells, and so on if they stay long
enough.



TIERS 3 AND 4
(Dungeon Level 2)

The second level of the dungeon consists of
Tier 3 and Tier 4 of the pyramid. Tier 3
includes rooms 13-24. The third tier contains
the headquarters for the Brotherhood of
Gorm, the Magi of Usamigaras, and the War-
tior Maidens of Madarua. These can become
“safe” areas for characters who join these
groups. Tier 4 includes rooms 25-40. It holds
the burial chambers of King Alexander,
Queen Zenobia and many important court
officials from their time.

The Revolving Passage. The central area is
the most unusual feature of the third tier. It
houses a passage on a turntable. A machine-
like system of weights and counter-weights
makes the passage turn.

On the wall inside each of the revolving
passage is a row of eight buttons. They match
the buttons in the halls. When one of the
inside buttons is pressed, that end of the pas-
sage will swing clockwise to line up with the
proper hall.

A door to the central area will open only if
the revolving passage is lined up with it. Next
to each door to the revolving passageway is a
button with a symbol on it. When the buttom
is pressed, the passage swings clockwise to line
up with the door, making faint grinding nois-
es. If the passage is already lined up with the
door, nothing happens.

Wandering Monsters

Wandering monsters are encountered on a roll
of 1 on 1d6. Check for wandering monsters
once every 2 game turns. Roll 1d8 on the Wan-
dering Monster Table: Level 2 table for the
monster encountered, or choose one.

Bat, Giant. Giant bats “see” by echo-location
(like radar). One of the giant bats encoun-
tered is a giant vampire bat. Any character
bitten by this bat must save vs. Paralysis or fall
unconscious for 1-10 rounds. Any character
killed by the bite of a giant vampire bat must
save vs. Spells or become an undead creature
24 hours after death. The DM chooses which
undead creature the victim will become.

Brotherhood of Gorm. This encounter will
be with a party of the Brothers of Gorm travel-
ing to their shrine in room 24. For more
details about the Brothers see rooms 11 and
12.

Cynidicean. See the encounters given
under “Cynidicean” in the New Monsters sec-
tion or make up new ones.


Hobgoblin. These are on a mission for the
Priests of Zargon (capturing prisoners, raiding
another faction, or so on).

Magi of Usamigaras. This is a party of Magi
traveling to their shrine in room 14. For more
details about the Magi, see room 14.

Rock Baboon. Rock baboons are larger,
more intelligent versions of normal baboons.
They will eat anything, but prefer meat. Rock
baboons do not make tools but use bones or
branches as clubs. They are ferocious and have
vicious tempers. These are hunting for food.

Snake, Spitting Cobra. A spitting cobra is a
3' long, grayish-white snake that can squirt a
stream of venom a distance of 6’. It aims for its
victim’s eyes. If the venom hits, the victim
must save vs. Poison or be blinded. While the
snake will usually spit its venom, it may bite
instead. If a victim is bitten, he or she must
save vs. Poison or die. (Note on Blindness. In
the D&D Basic rules, a blinded character can
attack at —4. The DM may create special ways
to cure blindness. For example, the DM might
allow washing the victim's eyes with holy
water, then casting a cure light wounds spell
on the victim. The cure spell would not restore
any lost hit points if it was used to heal blind-
ness. Instead of being immediately cured,
sight might return in 1-6 turns.)

Warrior Maidens of Madarua, This party of
Warrior Maidens is traveling to their shrine in
room 23.

DM NOTE: The outcome of an encounter
with one of the three factions often depends
on previous encounters. For example, charac-
ters who have joined the Brotherhood of
Gorm, and are wearing its masks or necklaces,
will likely find a group of Warrior Maidens
unfriendly, if not openly hostile.

REVOLVING PASSAGEWAY SYMBOLS

Vv

N —

Cog
o
oy

KEY TO TIER 3

13. ABANDONED CEREMONIAL
CHAMBER

 

This room is a ruined chapel of some kind.
Tattered tapestries hang from the walls. A
dusty altar along the north wall is covered
with a rotted altar cloth. The candlesticks,
offering bowl, and holy symbol on the
altar are carved out of wood. The holy sym-
bol looks like an eye. Next to the altar you
see a 6’ long lizard with wide flaps of skin

 

 

between its legs.

 

The giant lizard is a Draco (AC 5; HD 4 +2;
hp 20; MV 40’, fly 70’; #AT 1; D 1-10; Save
F3; ML 7; AL N). Behind the altar is the
remains of a human thief. The body has a full
canteen and a sack containing 400 gp and 2
gems, each worth 100 gp. The candlesticks,
bowl and holy symbol are made from rare
teakwood. They are worth 50 gp, 25 gp, and
25 gp respectively.

14, THE MAGI OF USAMIGARAS

This corridor has been painted black with tiny
white stars to resemble the night sky. The door
on the north wall to chamber 14a is iron and
has a star carved into it. If the party opens the
door, a bell will begin to ring.

14a. THE CHAMBER OF THE MAGI

 

Along the north and west walls of this
room hangs a large tapestry showing the
major constellations. You have interrupted
a religious service. Thirteen figures in
rainbow-colored robes and silver masks
stand in front of a stone, star-shaped altar.
The masks match the face of the middle
statue on the pyramid, the winged child.
The center-most figure of the group wears
a silver crown.

 

 

 

The worshippers are the Magi of Usamigaras
(AC 9; M1; hp 3 each; MV 40’; #AT 1; D 1-4;
Save M1; ML 8; AL N). Twelve of them are
first level magic-users. The one wearing the
silver crown is Auriga Sirkinos, Chief Mage of
Usamigaras (AC 9; M3; hp 10; MV 40’; #AT
1; D 1-4; $9,118, W 10, D 12, C 10, Ch 15).
Each Mage has silver lines forming a small star
symbol on the palm of his or her right hand.

Stout Auriga Sirkinos appears to be jolly
and fun-loving. His mirth actually hides a
ruthless personality. He is a fanatic who will
do anything to promote the cult of Usami-
garas and his own power. He tries his best to



hide this under a pleasant manner. While he
will welcome the party, he will also do his best
to insure that he, personally, retains the most
power in the cult. However, if it comes to a
choice between the Magi of Usamigaras or the
personal power of Auriga Sirkinos, he will
choose personal power.

If the party attacks: the twelve first level
magic-users each have a different spell. Each
has one of the twelve first level spells listed in
the D&D Basic rules: charm person, detect
magic, floating disc, hold portal, light, magic
missile, protection from evil, read languages,
read magic, shield, sleep, and ventriloquism.
Auriga Sirkinos has the spells detect magic,
hold portal, and phantasmal force. Those
with attack spells will cast them at the party.
Those with defensive spells will cast them. All
will attack the party hand-to-hand, though
Auriga will run through the door and cast
hold portal on it if things are going badly.

Hidden inside the stone altar is a secret
compartment. It is protected by a poison nee-
dle trap (save vs. Poison or die). Anyone who
tries to open the compartment without find-
ing and removing the trap will trigger it.
Inside the compartment is a mace +1 and a
wand of magic detection with 5 charges. The
silver masks are worth 20 gp each and the
crown is worth 200 gp. Each magic-user also
has a silver dagger worth 30 gp.

If the party doesn’t attack: they may learn
that the Magi of Usamigaras is another cult
trying to restore the lost glory of Cynidicea.
All current members are Cynidiceans, but the
Magi are willing to let outsiders join in. The
DM can decide this or roll 246. On a roll of 9-
12 the party members will be asked to join.
On a roll of 6-8 the party members may join,
but will not be asked to. On a roll of 2-5 the
party will be attacked or driven off as enemies
or spies from one of the other cults, Subtract 3
from the roll if the party shows any signs of
belonging to one of the other groups (such as
wearing a mask of Gorm). Add 2 to the roll if
the party can convince the Magi that the party
has defeated members of another cult.

Only magic-users, elves, thieves, and clerics
may become full members. Other classes may
only become lesser members. Full members
will be initiated by placing their right hand on
the center of the altar, palm down. They then
recite the pledge: “I, (character's name), do
hereby pledge to serve and obey the great
Usamigaras.” When he or she says the name
“Usamigaras,” a five-pointed star will be mag-
ically burned into the character's palm. Full
members will be given silver masks, daggers,
and rainbow-colored robes.

Lesser members will not be initiated, but


 

will be given a silver ring carved with Usami-
gara’s face. The robes, masks, daggers, and
rings are kept in a stronghold in the under-
ground city. It will take about half a day for
them to be fetched. While the party waits, the
Magi will aid them against wandering mon-
sters, and will provide food and drink. The
DM may make this a “safe” area.

15. QUARTERS FOR THE MAGI OF
USAMIGARAS

 

This room contains six double bunkbeds.
At the foot of each bunkbed are two wood-
en chests. The room looks clean and well
kept.

 

 

 

The wooden chests are foot lockers. They con-
tain spare robes and various personal belong-
ings, but nothing of great value. The first
level Magi in room 14 stay here when away
from their faction’s Lost City stronghold.

16. QUARTERS FOR THE CHIEF MAGE
OF USAMIGARAS

or choke to death within 6 rounds. There is
nothing of value in the crates.

17a. WATER TRAP

When a human-sized character crosses the
room, the DM rolls 1d6. On a roll of 1 or 2,
the trap is sprung. Both doors slam shut and
water pours into the 10’ x 10’ area from vents
high up in the walls. Unless the trapped char-
acter forces open a door within three tries, or
thinks of some way to breathe, he or she will
drown.

Once the room fills with water, concealed
drains in the floor open. The water drains out,
and the trap automatically resets. If a charac-
ter opens the door to room 18 while the water
is pouring in, the water will rush into room
18. The water will overturn the basket and
free the pit vipers inside it (see room 18), then
disappear down concealed drains.

18. SECRET ROOM

 

This room looks empty except for a large
wicker basket in the middle of the room.

 

 

 

This is a comfortable-looking bedroom
that shows signs of recent occupation.
Chained to the foot of the bed is a gray
wolf, The wolf growls when the door is
opened.

 

 

 

The wolf (AC 7; HD 2+2; hp 11; MV 60’;
#AT 1; D 1-6; Save Fl; ML 6; AL N) was cap-
tured as a cub and has been trained to act as a
watch dog. It is guarding the personal funds
of Auriga Sirkinos: 2500 sp and 200 gp kept in
a locked metal chest under the bed.

17. ABANDONED STOREROOM

 

This room is filled with shelves. Most of
these are empty, but some contain old
crates. The shelves are covered with dust
and a vile-looking yellow fungus that
grows in large, thick clusters.

 

 

 

The yellow fungus is yellow mold (AC n/a;
HD 2 per 10 square feet; hp 9 per 10 square
feet; MV 0; #AT 1; D 1+6+spores; Save F2;
ML n/a; ALN). The mold covers shelves along
all four walls. Each 10’ square of the room has
2 HD worth of mold covering it. Hence, there
are six separate sections of mold, each with 9
hp. Yellow mold can only be killed by fire. If it
is touched, there is a 50% chance the mold
will shoot out a 10’ X 10’ X 10’ cloud of
spores. Anyone caught in the cloud takes 1-6
points of damage and must save vs. Death Ray

Coiled atop the pile of treasure in the basket
are two 5' long pit vipers (AC 6; HD 2*; hp 9
each; MV 30’; #AT 2; D 1-4 + poison; Save
F1; ML 7; ALN). The bite of these snakes is
poisonous. Pit vipers always attack first, due
to their quickness. No initiative roll is needed.
The wicker basket contains 3000 sp and 5
gems (10 gp, 50 gp, 100 gp, 100 gp, and 500
gp).

19. SHIFTING WALL

 

Ac the end of this short corridor is an 8' tall
bronze statue of a winged child with two
snakes twined around its body. It holds a
wand in one hand and a handful of coins in
the other. The statue looks firmly connect-
ed to the wall.

 

 

 

This statue of Usamigaras is hollow and hides
a shifting wall. If the wand is pulled left, the
wall shifts westward to the end of the hall. It
will block the last 10' section of the hall. The
wall will stay there for 3 turns, then move back
to its original position.

If the wand is pulled right, the statue will
breathe out a cloud of choking gas. The gas
cloud covers the 30’ length of the corridor.
Anyone who stays in the area will take 1 point
of damage per round from the gas.

The gas will disappear after 2 turns (120
rounds). There is only one gas charge in the



statue (the Magi recharge the statue when nec-
essary).

19a. STOREROOM

 

The room is filled with crates and barrels.
Four large brown beetles, each about 3’
long, are breaking into them.

 

 

 

The beetles are oil beetles (AC 4; HD 2*; hp
9; MV 40’; #AT 1+ oil; D 1-6; Save Fl; ML 8;
ALN). Oil beetles can squirt an oily fluid at
one victim up to 5’ away. If the oil hits, it
raises painful blisters, causing the victim to
fight with a penalty of —2 on his or her “to
hit” rolls until a cure light wounds spell is
used or until 24 hours have passed. If the spell
is used to cure the blisters, it will not also cure
points of damage. Oil beetles also have a bite
attack.

The crates are filled with dried food and the
casks are filled with wine. This food was
recently stored here by the Magi of Usami-
garas and is edible. As long as the crates and
casks have not been broken open by the bee-
tles, the food and wine will be good, even if
the crate or barrel has been sprayed with the
beetles’ oil.

20. ABANDONED CEREMONIAL
CHAMBER

 

This room looks like a ruined chapel. It has
been looted and deliberately wrecked. The
stone altar has been smashed, and no cer-
emonial equipment can be seen. The word
“Zatgon” has been scrawled on one wall in
large letters.

 

 

 

This ceremonial chamber of the old Immortals
of Cynidicea was wrecked by the followers of
Zatgon centuries ago. Except for the wreck-
age, the room is empty.

20a. ENTRANCE TO TIER 4

A 20' long section of the floor in the southern
part of the room has been hinged to swing
down to the west when anyone steps on it. It
swings slowly down to rest against a ramp in
room 38. The hinged floor section is the
entrance to Tier 4. Characters can walk down
the floor section into room 38.

21, ARCH OF THE WARRIOR MAIDENS

 

You see two 10’ tall statues of women fight-
ers. The fighters wear masks with the face

 

 

 


 

of the female statue on top of the pyramid.
The two statues stand with spears out-
stretched to form an arch. The only way
down the corridor appears to be in single
file under the crossed spears.

 

 

 

Just beyond the arch formed by the spears is a
hidden pressure plate in the floor. Each time
someone steps on the plate, a hidden chime
rings in room 23. The chime warns the War-
rior Maidens that someone is approaching the
shrine and reveals how many are in the party.

21a. THE CHAMBER OF MADARUA

The door to this room is locked. If the party
cannot unlock the door, it can be battered
down in 1 turn. If the door is battered down,
the Warrior Maidens in room 23 will come to
investigate.

 

Near the northeast corner of this room is an
altar covered with a green and white cloth.
On the altar sits a 3 tall statue of a woman
holding a sword and a sheaf of wheat. To
each side of the statue burns a large white
candle. In front of the altar itself, incense
burns in three small braziers. White drapes
hang on all the walls and the floor is cov-
ered by a green carpet. The room is dust-
free and has been scrubbed clean. Except
for the ceremonial equipment, the room

appears empty.

 

 

 

The Warrior Maidens of Madarua keep their
shrine clean, with candles and incense burn-
ing all year round. From tiny holes in the wall,
hidden by the white cloth hanging, the War-
rior Maidens in room 23 can hear any loud
noises. The sound carries through room 22,
which also has been fitted with listening
holes. The Warrior Maidens will investigate
any loud noises. If any party member has des-
ecrated the shrine, the Warrior Maidens will
attack.

22. TREASURE ROOM OF THE WARRIOR
MAIDENS OF MADARUA

 

The room appears to be empty except fora
large stone vault in the middle of the east
wall. The vault has a keyhole. It looks like
the stone slabs that make up the vault are

 

 

too heavy to be moved.

 

The stone vault contains the treasure of the
Warrior Maidens. It is trapped. Any character
standing in front of the keyhole who tries to
open the vault and fails will be hit by a large

stone block that falls from the ceiling. The
stone block will not fall if the key is used or the
lock is successfully picked. The stone block
does 2-12 points of damage. The Warrior
Maidens in room 23 will hear any loud noises
in this room (see room 21a). The treasure of
the Warrior Maidens of Madarua is 600 ep,
1000 gp, and 300 pp.

23. WARRIOR MAIDENS OF MADARUA

 

Ten women are seated around a table.
They all wear bronze chain mail over green
tunics. Each woman's face is covered by a
bronze mask of the face of the woman
whose statue is atop the pyramid.

 

 

 

The women are all Warrior Maidens of Mada-
tua. Seven are 1st level fighters (AC 5; F1; hp
5 each; MV 20’; #AT 1; D 1-8; Save Fl; ML8;
ALN). Two are 2nd level (AC 5 hp; hp 9; MV
20'; #AT 1; D 1-8; Save F2). The leader of the
Warrior Maidens is Pandora, Madarua’s
Champion, the tallest and oldest of the wom-
en (AC 5; F3; hp 20; MV 20’; #AT 1 at +3; D
1-8 +3; ALN; $17,112, W 11,D12,C15, Ch
14). She wields a sword +1, has a +2 bonus
in combat from Strength, and raises the
morale of the Warrior Maidens to 9. She also
carries the key to the treasure vault in room
22.
Pandora prides herself on being a simple
fighter. She claims that swift action is the best
solution to any problem. “When in doubt,
attack” she often says. Actually she is more
subtle than she leads people to believe. She
always keeps track of the odds. While she
often uses force to settle problems, she tries to
make sure that the odds are with her. She
raises the morale of any Warrior Maidens she is
with to 9.

If the party doesn’t attack: they may find
that the Warrior Maidens of Madarua are
another group trying to restore the lost glories
of Cynidicea. All the current members are
Cynidicean female fighters, but they are will-
ing to take outsiders as members. The DM
may decide or roll 2d6. On a roll of 9-12 party
members will be asked to join. On a roll of 6-8
the party may join, but will not be asked. On
a roll of 2-5, the party will be attacked or driv-
cn off as enemies and spies. Subtract 3 from
the roll if any characters show signs of belong-
ing to another group. Add 2 to the roll if the
party proves that they have defeated another
cult.

Female fighters, female dwarves, female
halflings, and female elves can become full
members of the Warrior Maidens of Madarua.



All other characters may only become lesser
members.

Characters wanting to become full mem-
bers will undergo a short initiation ceremony.
The character draws her sword and pricks one
of her fingers with it. She smears the blood
from her finger on the sword blade. The sword
is then placed on the alter of Madarua. The
character swears to uphold the honor of Mada-
tua, even with her own blood if necessary.
Finally, a small sickle is branded on the inside
of the initiate’s left wrist. Full members will
be given bronze masks and green robes.

Lesser members will not be initiated. They
will be given a bronze bracelet showing Mada-
tua’s face. The bracelets, robes, and masks are
kept in a stronghold in the underground city.
It will take about half a day for them to be
fetched. While the party waits, the Warrior
Maidens will aid them against wandering
monsters. Food and drink will be provided,
and this may be a “safe” area.

24. DOOR TRAP

 

You see an iron door at the end of the corri-
dor. The door has three lightning bolts
engraved on it.

 

 

 

The door guards the ceremonial chamber of
Gorm (room 24a.). When anyone comes with-
in 10' of the door, it glows with a crackling
blue light. The door is locked. Once the words
“By the Immortal Gorm” are spoken, the
door stops glowing and it is safe to enter. Any-
one who touches the door without saying the
proper words automatically takes 1-4 points of
electrical damage while trying to pick the
lock.

24a. THE CEREMONIAL CHAMBERS OF
GORM

 

The walls, ceiling, and floor of this room
have been painted sky blue. A golden mar-
ble altar, surrounded by golden candle-
holders and braziers, rests along the
middle of the east wall. On top of the altar
is a small stone statue of a bearded man
throwing a lightning bolt. Next to the
statue rests a golden bowl.

 

 

 

These are the ceremonial chambers of Gorm.
No non-members are allowed in this room.
New members of the Brotherhood are initi-
ated here. The initiation is simple. The char-
acter dresses in a white robe and ritually
washes his hands in the bowl (which contains
water). He draws his weapon and kneels


 

before Gorm’s altar. He then swears, in Law,
to uphold the ideals of the Brotherhood and
to promote the worship of Gorm. Finally, the
new member receives a tattoo of a blue light-
ning bolt on his right shoulder.

The secret door in the west wall conceals a
ladder up to room 12 on Tier 2.

KEY TO TIER 4

Tier 4 holds the burial chambers of King Alex-
ander, Queen Zenobia, and major nobles,
clerics, and others who lived during their
reign.

25. NOBLEMAN’S BURIAL ROOM

 

This room has scenes of warfare painted on
the walls. It also has a large wooden sar-
cophagus standing upright along the south
wall. Painted on the outside of the sar-
cophagus is the picture of a warrior in
armor. Squatting on each side of the sar-
cophagus is a large ape with white fur.

 

 

 

These two creatures are white apes (AC 6; HD
4; hp 18 each; MV 40’; #AT 2; D 1-4/1-4;
Save F2; ML 7; ALN). The white apes have
made this room their lair. When the room
door is opened, the apes will beat their chests
and threaten the party. If their threats are
ignored, they will attack.

White apes sometimes throw rocks for 1d6
points of damage each. These have gathered a
plentiful supply of rocks to defend their lair.

Inside the satcophagus is a mummified
body wearing full plate armor and holding a
sword. The sword is a magical sword +1.

25a. GHOSTLY HAUNTS

 

As you walk down the corridor, the shim-
mering, ghostlike figures of a man and a
woman appear before you. They are
dressed in costly clothing, and both wear
golden crowns. The man raises his hand
and gestures for you to stop.

“Go no further,’ he warns, “lest the
curse of King Alexander overtake you!”

“IT am Queen Zenobia,’ the woman
says. “Turn back; only death awaits you!”

 

 

 

The shimmering figures of King Alexander
and Queen Zenobia are haunts. Characters
who see the haunts must save vs. Spells or try
to run away in fear. The fear lasts for 1-4 turns.
The haunts are otherwise harmless. Since they
have no real physical existence, haunts cannot
be hurt by physical attack or spells.

26. TOMB ANNEX

 

The floor of this long, narrow room has a
ted and white checkerboard pattern of 2'
X 2' squares. Court scenes are painted on
the north and south walls. In the east wall,
there is a 2’ high opening at floor level near
the southeast corner.

 

 

 

Room 26 is the annex to the burial chambers
of King Alexander and Queen Zenobia. This
corridor was kept open when the pyramid was
built in order to bring in the bodies of the
king and queen. After the funerals, the corri-
dor was sealed from the outside.

26a. TOMB TRAPS

Three pendulum blades are hidden in the
ceiling. If a character walks into any of the
three marked squares, roll 1d6. On a roll of 1
the trap is triggered. Victims caught in the
trap, or characters who try to run through the
swinging blades, will be unhurt if they roll
their dexterity score or lower on 1420. Those
who fail each take 1d10 points of damage.
The pendulum shafts are covered with a sticky
green goo that looks like green slime. The goo
is harmless. The blades will swing for one
turn, then automatically reset.

Special 10’ square ceiling blocks were
designed to fall and block the passage after
the burials. The 2’ high opening in the east
wall was formed when one block failed to fall
all the way. A 2’ high crawl-space remains
between the floor and the bottom of the
block. The block looks like it will fall no fur-
ther. But the party cannot be sure. The DM
should increase the tension by telling the par-
ty that they hear creaking noises coming from
the stone block as they are crawling under-
neath it.

The next obstacle the party must overcome
are two stone blocks that cracked into rubble
when they fell. It will take the party a full curn
to clear away enough rubble so they can go
further.

The final obstacle is a narrow, twisting cor-
ridor, wide enough for but one person at a
time. The corridor was formed when several
stone blocks fell crookedly.

27. COUNCILOR’S BURIAL ROOM

The door to this room has a 2’ wide hole
gnawed in it near the floor.

 

Painted on the walls of this room are scenes

 

 

of a throne room with a man giving advice

 

to kings and queens. In the center of the
room lies a wooden coffin. Large holes have
been gnawed in the sides of the coffin.

 

 

 

The holes in the coffin and the door have been
gnawed by 3 giant shrews (AC 4; HD 1*; hp 4
each; MV 50’; #AT 2; D 1-6/1-6; Save Fl; ML
10; AL N). The giant shrews have made the
coffin their lair. The coffin is empty except for
the giant shrews. The body and any treasure
have been stolen.

The giant shrews have burrowed through a
weak spot in the door and use the hole as an
exit when they go hunting in the pyramid cor-
tidors.

Like bats, giant shrews depend on sound
“echoes” to “‘see.” As soon as the giant shrews
sense anything nearby, they will attack.
Because of their quickness, they always gain
initiative on the first attack, and are +1 on
initiative for the second attack. Their ferocity
is so great that any character of third level or
less attacked by them must save vs. Death Ray
or run away in fear. A silence, 15’ spell will
blind them.

27a. TRAP DOOR

 

In the middle of the floor at this point is a
large stone slab with a bronze ring bolted
deeply into it.

 

 

 

The slab is a trap door. When the trap door is
opened the party will see an iron ladder lead-
ing down to room 44 on Tier 5.

28. HIGH PRIEST’S BURIAL ROOM

 

The door to this room is scorched, as is the
end of the corridor. The outline of a man-
sized humanoid form is etched into the
scorched wall section. The door to the
room is slightly open, but not enough to
see into the room.

 

 

 

The man-sized outline is that of a ghoul. The
ghoul was blasted to ashes when it accidently
triggered the magical trap guarding the door.
Now that the trap has been triggered, the
door can be opened safely.

 

Along the walls are paintings of a priest
performing ceremonies. On a raised dais in
the middle of the room lies an open bronze
sarcophagus. Here, three hideous, beast-
like humanoids are tearing a mummified
body apart with their sharp claws.

 

 

 




 

The three creatures are ghouls (AC 6; HD 2*;
hp 9 each; MV 30’; #AT 3; D 1-3 all; Save F2;
ML 9; AL C). Any non-elf creature hit by a
ghoul must make a save vs. Paralyzation or be
paralyzed. Tossed inside the sarcophagus are a
jeweled necklace worth 1500 gp and two jew-
eled bracelets each worth 600 gp. The ghouls
have stripped them from the body and thrown
them away.

29. EMBALMING ROOM

 

This room contains several large tables.
Around the walls are a number of large jars
and casks. There is a bin in the northwest
corner of the room.

 

 

 

This room was used for embalming (preparing
bodies for burial). Concealed in the room are 5
shadows (AC 7; HD 2*; hp 11 each; MV 30’;
#AT 1; D 1-4 + drain strength; Save F2; ML 12;
ALC), They will surprise the party on a roll of 1-
5 on 1d6. These intelligent ghost-like creatures
look like real shadows. If a shadow scores a hit, it
will drain 1 point of Strength in addition to
doing normal damage. This weakness will last 8
turns. Shadows cannot be affected by sleep or
charm spells. They can only be hit by magical
weapons. If the party has no magical weapons, it
is suggested that the DM let them run away after
the first shadow attack. The shadows will not
leave this room.

If the party destroys the shadows they can
search the room. The jars and casks are filled
with various spices used in embalming. The
spices have been stored in this room so long
that they are now worthless. The bin is filled
with rotten linen winding cloths. Underneath
the rotten linen is a potion of invisibility and a
chest filled with 3000 sp.

30. LADY-INWAITING BURIAL ROOM

 

A white ivory coffin lies in a niche in the
east wall. Painted on the walls are scenes
from court life, focusing on the life of
ladies-in-waiting to Queen Zenobia.

 

 

 

The coffin is empty. Except for the coffin, the
room is empty.

31. GUARD CAPTAIN’S BURIAL ROOM

 

A mummified human in plate armor and
holding a halberd stands at attention

 

 

 

 

against the west side of the south wall.
Grouped around the mummy are nine
skeletons holding swords, also at atten-
tion.

 

 

 

The mummified body is one of the guard cap-
tains from the reign of King Alexander. It is
not an undead monster and its armor and
weapons are normal. The skeletons are
undead monsters (AC 7; HD 1; hp 4 each; MV
20'; #AT 1; D 1-6; Save Fl; ML 12; AL C).
They will attack the party as soon as the char-
acters enter and will fight until destroyed.
There is no treasure here.

32. QUEEN ZENOBIA’S BURIAL
CHAMBER

 

The walls of this room are plain stone. An
oblong box made from stone slabs lies in
the center of the room. Written in several
languages on the side of the box are the
words: “May the curse of darkness destroy
all who dare desecrate my resting place.”
The box is 3’ high, 7' long, and 3' wide.

 

 

 

The stone box contains the wooden coffin of
Queen Zenobia. If the coffin is opened, the
party will find that Zenobia is now a wight
(AC 5; HD 3*; hp 24; MV 30’; #AT 1; D
energy drain; Save F3; ML 12; ALC). She will
attack on sight (roll initiative normally). A
wight can only be hit by silvered or magical
weapons. Each hit by the wight drains one
level of experience (including one hit dic)
from the victim. The queen’s chamber once
contained a treasure trove. However, the only
treasure left is the jeweled crown she wears
(5000 gp) and her sceptre (actually a wand of
paralyzation with 8 charges). Since becoming
a creature of darkness, she has forgotten how
to use the wand.

33. FALSE TOMB

 

This room contains two large sarcophagi.
Both gleam with golden highlights. One
sarcophagus is marked “Alexander,” the
other is marked “Zenobia.” Surrounding
the sarcophagi are a number of large wood-
en chests. The room is littered with broken
objects: two smashed thrones, a broken
chariot, smashed pottery, broken weapons,
and torn clothing. Piles of bones cover the
floor. On the walls is a mosaic showing
famous events from the reign of King
Alexander and Queen Zenobia.

 

 

 



This is not the real tomb of King Alexander
and Queen Zenobia. This is a fake tomb to
fool grave robbers. The bodies inside the sar-
cophagi are actually those of royal slaves. The
real burial chambers of the king and queen are
rooms 32 and 34.

The sarcophagi are made of wood, painted
to look like gold. The chests contain small
items a king and queen might need in the
afterlife. All the items have been ritually
“killed” (broken, ripped, or smashed) just
like the larger items littering the floor. The
piles of bones are the remains of royal slaves
and royal animals killed after the funeral.

Four chests apparently contain 5000 sp,
6000 gp, 3000 ep, and 2000 pp. In the sar-
cophagi are 50 gems and 12 pieces of jewelry.
All coins and treasure are cheap counterfeits.
The actual value of all the items in the room is
only 450 gp. Dwarves or thieves will notice
that the gems, jewels, and coins are fake on a
roll of 1-5 (on 1d6, one roll only). If the party
does not have a dwarf or a thief, they will only
notice the deception on a roll of 1-3.

If the party taps on the walls (using a ham-
mer, wooden pole, or some similar object)
they will notice hollow sounds where the
secret doors open into the hidden corridors. If
the party cannot open the secret doors, they
can try to break them down. This will take 6
turns plus 1d6 turns. The DM should hint by
description that the party is making progress
(though slowly) until they finally break in.
The DM should describe all the noise the par-
ty is making as well. Wandering monsters are
rolled for normally.

34. KING ALEXANDER’S BURIAL
CHAMBER

 

The walls of this room are bare. In the cen-
ter of the room is an oblong box made
from stone slabs. Suddenly, rising out of
the stone box is a translucent, ghost-like
figure. The pale figure has glowing red
eyes and a large, dark mouth.

 

 

 

The translucent, ghost-like figure is a wailing
fey (AC 3; HD 5*; hp 26; MV 50’; #AT 1; D
wail for 1-4; Save F5; ML 12; ALC). The wail-
ing fey is a new monster. A wailing fey is a
supernatural creature that warns certain fami-
lies of an approaching death or mourns for
certain individuals after their deaths. Wailing
feys can only be hit by magical weapons or
harmed by magical spells.

The wailing fey is guarding King Alexan-
der's grave. It attacks by wailing. The DM
should describe the wailing fey’s piercing wail


 

and tell the party they can feel an icy death-
like chill. Then the DM should roll initiative.
If the party wins initiative and runs out of
range, they take no damage. Otherwise, all
individuals within 30' of the wailing wailing
fey take an automatic 1-4 points of damage
per round from the wailing attack. If the party
can get outside the room, and close the door
between themselves and the wailing fey, they
will be safe (even if still within the 30’ range of
the wail). The wailing fey will attack as soon as
the tomb door is opened.

King Alexander's tomb was looted long
ago, except for the treasure inside the wooden
coffin (which is inside the stone box). King
Alexander wears a jeweled crown worth 5000
gp. He has plate armor +1 and a sword +2.

35. SLAVE’S BURIAL ROOM

 

This room is filled with skeletons. The bones
lie in piles on the floor. They cover the floor
so thickly that it is impossible to walk across
the room without walking on bones.

 

 

 

The skeletons are the remains of household
slaves belonging to the various individuals
buried in the pyramid. Upon the deaths of
their masters, the slaves were herded together
and killed, then tossed into this room. The
skeletons are not undead. They are merely
bones.

36. CHAMBERLIN’S BURIAL ROOM

 

The walls of this room show painted scenes
of a man signing documents and organiz-
ing tax collection. A wooden coffin that
has been smashed open is lying on the
floor. Six pale-skinned humans stand
around the coffin. They all have wounds
bad enough to kill a normal person.

 

 

 

The six humans are zombies (AC 8; HD 2; hp
9 each; MV 30’; #AT 1; D 1-8; Save Fl; ML
12; AL C). Zombies are undead. They will
attack the party on sight and fight until
destroyed, always striking last. Zombies are
immune to sleep and charm spells. The coffin
has already been looted.

37. GIANT RAT LAIR

 

This room appears to be empty except for
an odd-shaped mound in the southwest

 

 

 

 

corner of the room. Rustling and faint
squeaking noises seem to come from the

 

 

mound.

 

Ten 3’ long, gray rats have made a nest in the
corner of the room. These are giant rats (AC 7;
HD 1/2; hp 2 each; MV 40’; #AT 1; D 1-3 +
disease; Save NM; ML8; ALN). Each giant rat
has a 1 in 20 chance of having a disease. A
character bitten by a diseased rat must save vs.
Poison or be infected. The disease has a 1 in 4
chance of being fatal in 1d6 days, otherwise
the character will be sick in bed (no adventur-
ing) for one month.

The rats’ nest conceals a small hole in the
west wall. This hole is just big enough for a
giant rat to crawl through. It leads to the corri-
dor to the west. Inside the rat's nest are 300 gp
and four 500 gp gems.

38. JESTER’S BURIAL ROOM

The floor from the tier above (20a) hinges
down to meet a ramp in this room.

 

Painted on the walls of this room are court
scenes showing King Alexander and
Queen Zenobia being entertained by a
dwarven jester. A small coffin rests in a
niche in the east wall and in each corner of
the room is a large brass jar.

 

 

 

If the lid of the coffin is touched, it will spring
off. An oversized wooden model of the head
of the dwarven jester, painted in bright colors,
will jump up. The head is attached to a coiled
spring like a jack-in-the-box. The coffin also
contains the ashes of the jester. The brass jars
look empty, but any item put completely into
any of them will be instantly teleported into a
large concealed hollow beneath the coffin.
The jars were used by the jester as his master
trick, in which he made items disappear to
amuse the court. The party can get to the hol-
low by removing the coffin.

39. ROLLING BOULDER TRAP

Any character who reaches the west door to
room 39a will trigger this trap. The wall in the
north corridor opens and a 10’ wide, round
boulder rolls out of the hidden area. The
boulder will roll down the long corridor at 40’
per round. When it stops, it will block the cor-
ner near room 40.

This boulder trap is not meant to kill player
characters, only scare them. Unless the party
does something obviously stupid (like stand-
ing and arguing while the boulder is rolling



toward them), the DM should let the party
escape after a close shave—into the room or
around a corner. The DM should describe the
rolling boulder as graphically as possible:
crashing sounds echoing down the corridor,
stone chips flying where the boulder smashes
against the wall, the corridor floor shaking
from the force of the boulder, etc. The
encounter should be exciting, but not deadly.

If the boulder strikes a character, it will do
3-30 points of damage. The boulder will stop
after it strikes one character or reaches the end
of the hall.

39a. NOBLE LADY’S BURIAL ROOM

 

A sarcophagus rests on a dais in the center
of the room. The dais is 10’ square. From
each corner of the dais rises a slender, 6’ tall
column. The tops of the columns meet the
corners of an arched dome above the sar-
cophagus. On the dais at each end of the
sarcophagus is a brass jar from which
flames dance. Finally, the walls of this
room are painted with scenes from the life
of a noble lady.

 

 

 

The noble lady’s mummified body rests in the
sarcophagus. The jewelry once worn by the
corpse has been stolen. The brass jars are bolt-
ed to the floor and their flames cannot be put
out. However, behind one of the brass jars is a
small bronze tube. It contains a piece of
parchment. The parchment is a map of the
southwest part of this tier marked with a large
black “X.” The “X” represents the location of
the trap door at 27a. The DM can either make
a map or guide the party to the trapdoor when
they get close.

40. MASTER THIEF’S BURIAL ROOM

 

An elaborate jeweled coffin lies in the cen-
ter of the room. Next to the coffin is a
worm-like creature, 9’ long and 3’ high. It
has many legs and its mouth is surrounded
by eight tentacles. Each tentacle is 2’ long.

 

 

 

The creature is a carrion crawler (AC 7; HD
3+1*; hp 13; MV 40’; #AT 8; D paralysis;
Save F2; ML9; ALN). A hit by a carrion crawl-
er paralyzes the victim unless a save vs. Paraly-
sis is made. The paralysis can be removed by a
cure light wounds spell, but any spell so used
will have no other effect. Without a spell, the
paralysis will wear off in 2-8 turns. The jewels
on the coffin are worth 3000 gp. A search of
the body will discover a set of lockpicks.


A master thief from the reign of King Alex-
ander and Queen Zenobia used his skills to
steal a place near the King and Queen in the
afterlife. He managed to exchange his own
coffin for that of the nobleman who was sup-
posed to be buried in this room.

TIER 5
(Dungeon Level Three)

The third dungeon level consists of Tier 5
(rooms 41-58). This tier, including the pyra-
mid’s main entrance, is buried under the
sand. Hidden in the main entry chamber
(room 50) is a secret door to a passage leading
to the underground city.

Wandering Monsters

Wandering monsters are encountered on a roll
of 1 on 1d6, Check for wandering monsters
once every 2 turns. Roll 1d8 on the Wandering
Monster Table: Level 3 table for the type of
monster encountered, or choose one.

Tiger Beetle. Tiger beetles are 4’ long and
have striped carapaces that look like tiger
skins. They are carnivorous and will attack if
hungry.

Cynidicean. As usual, the DM may use the
encounters given later, or make up a new one.
This could also be an encounter with members
of one of the factions.

Giant Ant. Giant ants are huge black ants
about 6’ long. When hungry,. they will eat
anything in their path. Further, once in com-
bat, they will fight to the death with no
morale checks. The DM can add a special tun-
nel to their lair, if desired.

Tuatara. A tuatara is an 8’ long giant lizard
that looks like a cross between an iguana and a
toad. It has pebble-colored olive skin and
white spikes along its back. It is carnivorous
and attacks when hungry. A tuatara has a
membrane over its eyes which, when lowered,
gives the giant lizard 90’ infravision.

Rust Monster. This monster escaped from
the Magi of Usamigaras.

Thoul. A thoul is a magical combination of
a ghoul, a hobgoblin, and a troll (for trolls,
see D&D Expert rules). Thouls look like hob-
goblins. The party will think these thouls are
hobgoblins until they attack. In combat, a
character hit by a thoul must save vs. Paralysis
or be paralyzed. (This is like a ghoul’s touch,
even though thouls are not undead.) A thoul
regenerates lost hit points while it is alive.
After a thoul is hit, the DM adds 1 to its hit
points at the beginning of each combat

round. The thouls serve the Priests of Zargon.
They hunt for prisoners to take back to the
Underground City.

KEY TO TIER 5
41. STORAGE ROOM

 

Shelves line the walls of this room. Stored
on the shelves are items used in religious
ceremonies (candles, incense, clerical
robes, etc.). Three huge, fearsome human-
like creatures wearing animal skins have
smashed open a box of candles and are eat-
ing them.

 

 

 

The three human-like creatures are ogres (AC
5; HD 4 +1; hp 19 each; MV 30’; #AT 1; D 1-
8+2; Save F4; ML 10; AL C). Ogres are not
too bright. They thought the candles looked
good to eat so they started eating them. They
have three huge leather sacks holding 500 gp,
500 gp, and 400 gp, a ring of fire resistance,
and a magic-user/elf scroll (continual light,
levitate, read languages).

42, CLERIC’S QUARTERS

 

This room contains three bunk beds. Lying
on them are humans dressed in bright yel-
low robes. They wear masks of a boar, a

 

tiger, and a wolf.

 

 

The masked humans are actually dopple-
gangers (AC 5; HD 4*; hp 18 each; MV 30’;
#AT 1; D 1-12; Save F10; ML 10). The dop-
plegangers took the forms of three Cynidi-
ceans, then killed the originals. They will try
to join the party, choosing one victim each.
When they have a chance to do it secretly, they
will change shape to look like the victim, then
try to kill the victim and take his or her place.
They are immune to sleep and charm spells.
The dopplegangers carry 9 gems worth a total
of 1500 gp.

43. TREASURE ROOOM

 

A slight breeze stirs in the room when the
door is opened. A large, padlocked wood-
en chest sits near the north wall of the
room. Behind the chest is a huge tapestry
of a desert scene.

 

 

 

The tapestry is actually a new monster, the
polymar (AC 9; HD 10; hp 45; MV 20’; #AT
3; D 1-6/1-6/1-6; Save F5; ML 10; ALC). A
polymar is a semi-intelligent, many-celled
creature that can reshape its body to look like



any creature of 10 HD or less, or any object up
to 10’ x 10’ x 10’ in size. The polymar will not
have any special abilities, only the shape of
the object or creature copied.

A close examination will show that the tap-
estry is not actually made from woven threads.
There is a 1 in 6 chance that one of the player
characters will notice something suspicious,
even without a close examination (2 in 6 if an
elf is present). For example, the tapestry will
not move in the breeze created when the door
is opened because the polymar is much heavi-
er than a real tapestry. If the polymar is not
detected, it will attack with surprise.

The treasure in the locked chest is 3000 gp,
a potion of invisibility, chain mail +1, and a
dagger +1.

44, SECRET ROOM

The ladder from the trap door at 27 leads
down into this room, The room is empty.

45. BEDROOM

 

This room contains a bed, a table, a chair, a
lantern, and a wooden holy symbol of two
intertwined snakes. The furniture is made
of wood. A hooded white robe is draped
over the chair. Except for the furniture and
the robe, the room appears to be empty.

 

 

 

This was once the bedroom of Demetrius, a
6th level cleric. Demetrius was an elder in the
cult of Usamigaras. His twin brother, Darius,
was a 6th level cleric in the cult of Zargon.
Years ago, Demetrius vowed to destroy the
cult of Zargon, especially his evil brother. But
Demetrius was assassinated before he could
even begin his quest.

Demetrius made a dying wish that his spirit
live on until Darius was destroyed. The spirit
of Demetrius now rests in the white robe. Any
character touching the robe must make a save
vs. Dragon Breath or be taken over by the spir-
it of Demetrius. Demetrius will only possess
the character long enough to kill Darius (see
room 58.

Though outwardly unchanged, the pos-
sessed character is now a 6th level Lawful cler-
ic. The character will have Demetrius’s
Wisdom (16), Intelligence (10), and hit
points (31). His saving throws will become:
Death Ray or Poison = 9, Wands = 8, Turn to
Stone = 12, Dragon Breath = 14, Spells =
10.

If Demetrius is reduced to 0 hp, the pos-
sessed character will die.


 

Demetrius has the following spells:
1st level: cure light wounds, detect evil
2nd level: bless, hold person
*3rd level: striking
*4th level: cure serious wounds

(*If using the D&D Expert rules only.)

The DM should allow the player whose char-
acter has been possessed to play Demetrius.
‘Take the player aside and tell him or her what
is happening, with as much background as
you think is needed. Encourage the player to
role play Demetrius as much as possible. Be
ready to remind the player, if necessary, that
Demetrius’ only goal is to kill his brother
Darius, and consider disallowing player
actions that are out of character.

Demetrius knows the way to room 58,
including any secret doors on the way. He does
not know about any of the traps on this level.
As long as the party moves by the quickest
route to Darius (room 58), Demetrius may
help them defeat monsters.

Demetrius will depart once Darius is dead,
and the white robe will disintegrate. The pos-
sessed character will be magically restored to
his or her own full hit points when Demetrius
leaves.

46. KITCHEN-DINING ROOM

 

This room appears to be an abandoned
kitchen and dining room combination.
The cupboards, table, and chairs are cov-
ered with a thin layer of dust. Near the
table, two large snakes with brown and yel-
low scales are coiled around the body of a
woman wearing a rabbit mask.

 

 

 

The two snakes are rock pythons (AC 6; HD
5*; hp 23 each; MV 30’; #AT 2; D 1-4/2-8;
Save F3; ML 8; AL N). They will attack the
party on sight. If a python’s bite attack is suc-
cessful, it will coil around the victim and con-
strict in the same round for 2-8 points of
damage. Thereafter, the constriction attack
automatically hits each round. Around the
neck of the dead Cynidicean is a necklace
worth 700 gp. Concealed in her robes is a full
water bottle and a small pouch of food.

47. LIVING ROOM

 

The room looks like a living room. It con-
tains wall hangings and ornate divans.
There are several pieces of sculpture in the
room, as well as an iron statue of a warrior
on each side of the doorway just inside the

 

 

 

 

room. Everything is covered by a thin layer
of dust.

 

 

 

The statues are actually living iron statues (AC
2; HD 4*; hp 18 each; MV 10’; D 1-9/1-8 +
special; Save F4; ML 11; AL N). They will
attack if the party enters the room and allows
the door to swing shut. While the door is held
or jammed open, the statues will not attack.
If a statue is hit by a non-magical metal
weapon, the attackers must save vs. Spells.
Failure means the weapon sticks to the body of
the iron statue and cannot be pulled away
until the statue is destroyed. Living iron
statues are not affected by sleep spells.

48. HIDDEN GUARDROOM

 

Four humans wearing stylized rat masks
and red robes trimmed with rat fur leap to
their feet and look at you. In the northeast
corner of the room are stairs going down.

 

 

 

The four men are actually wererats (AC 7; HD
3*; hp 13 each; MV 40’; #AT 1; D 1-4; Save F3;
ML8; ALC). These lycanthropes are disguised as
Cynidiceans so they can safely rob the citizens
when they get a chance. If threatened, the were-
rats will change into giant rat form and fight or
run. Like other lycanthropes, wererats in animal
form can only be hit by silvered or magical weap-
ons. They have a small chest with 2000 sp and 4
gems worth a total of 700 gp.

The stairs end in a bricked-up wall, unless
the DM wants to add the underground city.

49. CONSULTATION ROOM

 

The room is paneled with wood, and a dusty
carpet covers the floor. A large, heavy desk
sits in the center of the room. Several wooden
chairs are grouped north of the desk. Behind
the desk is a large plush chair, while behind
the chair on the south wall is a mounted
lion’s head. Four large painted urns stand in
the corners of the room. Finally, on both
sides of the north doorway are stone pedestals
with stone statues of winged beasts with
claws, fangs, and horns.

 

 

 

The two statues are gargoyles (AC 5; HD 4*; hp
18 each; MV 30’, fly 50’; #AT 4; D 1-3/ 1-3/1-
6/1-4; Save F8; ML 11; AL C). If the party is
expecting gargoyles when they see the statues,
roll initiative normally. If not, the party will be
surprised. The gargoyles will attack as soon as the
party enters the room. They can only be hit with
magical weapons and are not affected by sleep



or charm spells. The desk has three drawers and a
locked cabinet. Inside the cabinet are 2000 ep, a
mace +1, and a poison potion. Hidden in the
cushion of the plush chair are 18 gems each
worth 100 gp. The urns and lion head contain
nothing of value.

49a. PIT TRAP

This floor section conceals a hidden 10' deep
pit filled with spikes. The DM should roll for
each character entering this area—the trap is
triggered on a roll of 1 or 2 on 1d6. Characters
falling into the pit will take 2-12 (2d6) points
of damage. Remember that Demetrius does
not know about this pit.

50. MAIN ENTRY CHAMBER

 

The high, arched ceiling of this room is
supported by a double row of pillars. Each
pillar is carved into a statue of a king or
queen of Cynidicea. A series of mosaic pic-
tures decorate the walls of the room. These
start in the northeast corner and continue
clockwise around the room. In the center
of the north wall is a pair of huge stone
doors. At the base of the double doors, the
floor is partially covered with sand.

 

 

 

The mosaics show scenes from the history of
Cynidicea. From the northwest corner, the
mosaics show:

1. A tribe of squat, heavy-browed human-
oids wielding crude stone weapons wor-
ship a lizard-headed god.

2. A large band of tall, black-haired people
battle the humanoids and take over their
hunting grounds.

3. A village rises over the scene of the battle. In
the arid lands around the village are fields of
grain and vast herds of cattle and sheep.

4. A great leader arises in time of need and
gathers the villagers into an army that
destroys an enemy army of snake-headed
humanoids.

5. The victorious leader is crowned king, thus
founding the line of the rulers of Cynidicea.

6. The stone city of Cynidicea is built on the
site where the village stood.

7. Scenes of the splendor of the kingdom at
its height.

8. The births of King Alexander and Queen
Zenobia.

9. The great pyramid is built.

10. Slaves digging under the pyramid uncov-
er the foundations of an ancient temple.


 

11. The death of King Alexander and Queen
Zenobia and their burial in the pyramid.

12. The worship of the old Immortals Gorm,
Usamigaras, and Madarua is replaced by
the worship of a large humanoid with
many tentacles.

13. Life becomes a year-round carnival for the
Cynidiceans. All Cynidiceans are now
masked.

14, The Cynidiceans meet a barbaric, golden-
haired people (the ancestors of the
Heldann tribes).

15. The final picture is not a mosaic. It is a
crudely painted sketch that shows the
tribesmen looting Cynidicea.

There is room on the wall for more pictures,
but the space is blank. The huge doors, which
open outward, are blocked by sand and can-
not be opened. There is no treasure here.

50a. SECRET ENTRANCE TO THE
UNDERGROUND CITY

This secret trap door leads to a passageway to
the underground city. The party can find this
door only if the DM is continuing the adven-
ture past the upper pyramid.

51. CHAPEL

These werefoxes may bargain with the party or
try to charm them. They will try to trick the party
out of as much treasure and magic as possible.
The two will not take risks they can avoid, or
fight stronger opponents unless forced to. They
rely on their wits to survive. If attacked, the two
will turn into foxes to fight or escape. If hard
pressed, they may turn back into human form
and surrender. The werefoxes will lie, cheat, and
bribe the party if necessary to survive. They are
carrying three pieces of jewelry worth a total of
3000 gp, a sword +1, casts light on command
(30! radius), a helm of alignment change, and a
potion. So far, they have been afraid to test the
potion and don’t know what it is. It is a potion
of levitation. If forced to fight as humans, the
female will use the magical sword in combat.

This room was once the main chapel for
Cynidicea. It is seldom used now. The foun-
tains are fed by an underground lake. These
will provide all the water the party needs to
drink or to fill their water skins.

52. TRAP ROOM

 

The entire room is a large sunken pool filled
with a bubbling liquid. In the center of the
room is a box made of stone slabs. The lid of
the box is about a foot above the surface of
the liquid and is locked with a large iron pad-
lock.

 

 

 

This large room is obviously a place of wor-
ship. On each side of a broad center aisle
ate rows of high-backed wooden benches.
Narrow aisles along the walls run past
ornate mosaics to two small fountains set
into the walls. Just past the fountains, a
large dais fills the southern end of the
room. On the dais near a stone altar lie
three large statues that look like the ones
on top of the pyramid. The statues have
been toppled from their bases. A man and
a woman stand near the toppled statues
and talk softly to each other. They wear
brightly colored clothing and small bronze
fox masks. Both have red hair and there

 

seems to be a resemblance between them.

 

 

This brother and sister are actually werefoxes
(AC 9, 6 as fox; HD 3+2*; hp 16 each; MV
40', 60 as fox; #AT 1; D by weapon or 1-6;
Save F3; ML 8; AL N). They are disguised as
Cynidiceans to be better able to hunt for trea-
sure and supplies. Werefoxes are a new type of
lycanthrope (see Monsters). Each werefox can
try to charm a person of the opposite sex in
one round. This ability is like a charm person
spell, but lasts only one day. A werefox can
charm up to three times per day.

The bubbling liquid is acid. It will destroy any
material except stone and will do 2-8 points of

cach round to creatures that fall into it.
The acid is 6' deep. The stone box is on a special
pedestal. The pedestal will sink at a rate of 1/2”
per melee round if any weight is placed on the
box. If the weight is removed the pedestal will
rise at the same rate (though never higher than
1’ above the surface of the acid). Inside the box
are 20,000 sp and a clerical scroll (purify food
and water, remove curse).

53. ABANDONED CLERICAL QUARTERS

 

This room seems oddly damp. A strange
moist odor fills the air. The room contains a
low bed, some wooden shelves, and a small
chest. The contents of the room seem to
shimmer, as if seen through clear water or a
thick pane of glass.

 

 

 

Just inside the doorway is a gelatinous cube
(AC 8; HD 4*; hp 18; MV 20’; #AT 1; D 2-8
+ paralyzation; Save F2; ML 12; ALN). The
party is viewing the room through the gelati-
nous cube. The monster will move toward and
attack the party immediately. Victims hit by a



gelatinous cube must make a save vs. Paralysis
or be paralyzed for 2-8 turns (unless the paral-
ysis is removed by a cure light wounds spell).
The cube may be harmed by fire or weapons,
but not by cold or lightning. There is nothing
of value in the room. Its rotted contents will
crumble when touched.

54. STORAGE ROOM

 

This room is lined racks of wine bottles.
Along the west wall are large casks and bar-
rels. Several casks have been smashed open
and their contents drained. Suddenly,
from behind a stack of barrels, a huge
bear-like creature with the head of a giant
owl appears and staggers toward you.

 

 

 

The creature is an owl bear (AC 5; HD 5; hp 30;
MV 40’; #AT 3; D 1-8 each; Save F3; ML 9; AL
N). It is completely drunk and ravenously hun-
gry. If not fed immediately it will attack. It
attacks at —2 to hit, but its morale is 10. If both
paws hit the same opponent in one round, the
owl bear will “hug” for an additional 2-8 points
of damage. The room contains 400 bottles of
wine worth a total of 100 gp.

55. PARTY ROOM

 

Nine men and women in bright costumes
and fancy masks are drinking, talking, and
dancing in this room. It appears to be a
masked ball. Most of the people are danc-
ing as if they had invisible partners. You
hear snatches of conversation, most of
which makes no sense. The people seem to
be talking to themselves.

 

 

 

These nine people are Cynidiceans (AC 9;
NM; hp 4 each; MV 40’; #AT 1; D 1-6; ML
special; AL C). As usual, the Cynidiceans are
in their own dream world. They will assume
that the characters are merely part of the
dream. There is no treasure here.

56. CRASHING WALLS

 

A hidden pressure plate in the center of
the hall triggers this trap. The walls just
ahead of the party crash together and fly
apart. The trap is automatically triggered
the first time the party passes.

 

 

 

This trap has two purposes. First, it alerts Darius
in room 58 that someone is coming. Second, it
will be a dangerous hazard to a party leaving
room 56a if everyone forgets it is here. (In this
case it is triggered by a 1d6 roll of 1 or 2, and


 

does 3-18 points of damage to characters behind
the triggering character). The pressure plate will
be easily seen and avoided if the characters are
looking for it on the way out.

56a. LOBBY

 

Ten Cynidiceans wearing dark robes and
masks of fearsome, imaginary monsters sit
in a circle in this room. They are staring
straight ahead, but don’t seem to be look-
ing at anything in particular.

 

 

 

The Cynidiceans (AC 9; NM; hp 4 each; MV 40’;
#AT 1; D 1-6; ML special; AL C) are in their own
dream world. These particular Cynidiceans, how-
ever, are in nightmare worlds. They will react to
party actions, and may even attack the party, but
the Cynidiceans will never speak, ee
wounded. They might scream at random from
some unseen terror. This screaming, however, will
not match reality (that is, they will not scream if
touched or attacked).

57. GAMBLING ROOM

 

A dozen brightly robed men and women
masked as various animals are playing games
of chance. Card games are being played at one
table, dice games at another. In the center of
the room is a large wheel of fortune. Many sil-
ver and gold coins, gems, and pieces of jewelry
are changing hands as people win and lose.

 

 

 

Because they are sharing a common dream, these
Cynidiceans act more normally than those in
rooms 54 and 55. They will continue gambling
and talking about gambling unless physically
attacked. They may even invite the party to join
in. If attacked, they will fight back. They will
assume that a gang of robbers has broken into the
game room to steal their money. Further, if the
party tries to take the money without winning it,
the cleric and his hobgoblin guards from room 58
will enter through the secret door in the south wall
and attack.

If the player characters want to join the
games and gamble, the DM may use any sim-
ple system to work out the results. For exam-
ple, the DM and the player might each roll
1d20. The highest roll wins and the player
loses all ties. Wagers are set before the dice are
rolled (a minimum of 50 gp and a maximum
of 1000 gp are suggested). The characters can-
not win any more money than is currently in
this room. If the characters begin winning
large sums, the cleric from room 58 is likely to
attack since he considers all the money in this
room to belong to him—as a priest of Zargon

he plans to take most of the money as “taxes.”

A character possessed by Demetrius will go
immediately to the proper wall section and
start looking for the secret door. He will know
his enemy is very close.

The gambling room contains 3000 sp, 5000
gP, 26 gems worth a total of 3100 gp, and six
pieces of jewelry worth 6000 gp total.

58. CLERIC’S CHAMBER

This room contains the evil cleric Darius and
his hobgoblin guards. They will be ready for
the party to enter, but it is more likely they
will come charging out of the room as the par-
ty tries to take the treasure in room 57. If the
party has tried to steal the treasure, the Cyni-
diceans in room 57 will join Darius to fight the
party. Otherwise, these will do nothing unless
attacked. The forces of Darius include:

Darius: AC 5; hp 22; MV 20’; #AT 1 at +1, or
spell; D 1-6 +1; Save C6; ML 10; ALC; S
13, 19, W 16, D9, C 13, Ch 14.

Darius has the following spells:

1st level: cure light wounds, light**

2nd level: bless**, silence 15’ radius

*3rd level: striking

*4th level: cause serious wounds

*Only if using the D&D Expert rules.
**Reverse if using the D&D Expert rules.

6 hobgoblins: AC 6; HD 1+1; hp 5 each; MV
30'; #AT 1; D 1-8; Save Fl; ML 8; AL C.
The DM may change the number of hob-
goblins as desired.

12 Cynidiceans: AC 9; NM; hp 4 each; MV
40'; #AT 1; D 1-6; ML 8; ALC.

Suggested spell use for Darius:

Before melee: bless the hobgoblins (or
blight the party)

Round 1: _ silence a party magic-user.
Round 2: striking on his own mace.
Round 3: other spells as appropriate.

Darius may use spells in different order asthe
fight develops, but he will always use his spells
as intelligently as possible.

Except for Darius and the hobgoblins, there
is nothing of interest in this room.

lll

When the characters no longer wish to adventure
in the Lost City, they can prepare for the trek over
the trackless wastes in an effort to reach civiliza-
tion. Take careful note of their preparations and
award some extra experience if they consider the
problem of desert survival carefully (such bonuses
should not exceed 200 XP each, although a very
good idea—like getting star charts from the Magi
of Usamigaras—might be worth 100 XP).
Even with the best of preparations, they will
not be able to find a map giving Cynidicea’s posi-
thoes dank ied aebereome kee emai
The party will be fortunate enough during
their desert trek not to have any hostile
encounters, nor to have to endure any of the
common sandstorms. The days will be blaz-
oye the nights bitterly cold.
The third day out, the party will see a small
dot in the distance, flying through the air and
approaching quickly. It ums out to be Armulf—

pleased to take them all with him. The magic
carpet is special, a secret command makes it grow
to hold the entire s

Once in the air, Arnulf cannot resist show-
ing off his new toy. He will put the carpet
through every violent maneuver he can think
of. The characters must each make a successful
Constitution check or become airsick. When
this bit of sport pales, Arnulf will settle down

humanoids if the opportunity presents itself,
though. As the group nears Specularum, the
party should be very glad to get down to the
(safe!) ground once more.

Should the party try to steal the carpet, they
will discover that they cannot make it work
properly (erratic maneuvers, tends to roll up
in flight unless held open, and so on). Also,
Arnulf has had a powerful wizard put a secret
mark on it so it can be traced if it is ever stolen.

When the party nears Specularum, Arnulf
will set the party down outside the city gates.

As the adventure in Specularum is the last
regular adventure in the book, most of the
characters should be around 3rd-4th level. If
they are not, you might want to have the
Immortal, Thendara, take them to the palace
of the Silver Princess if they have not been
there already. If so, go to Interlude E (p.46).

Phen > pln or apap tay

ity, Arnulf will know the way.


 

 

Fs wanllomaaenlee
NTT
Pa Ts

Cerca

“The Veiled fie eae

 

Design: David Cook

Editor: Anne C. Gray

Cover Art: Steve Chappell
Interior Art: Jim Roslof

Paper Sculpture: Dennis Kauth

The original module had cutout buildings
and stand-up character pieces, as well as a very
different map of Specularum. The text here is
little changed from the text of the original.

MaDe ie sid.) clever pile alblate sierstolaats 154-157

PREPARING FOR THE
ADVENTURE

The Veiled Society is an adventure that takes
place in the city of Specularum. Player charac-
ters become involved in the power struggles of
the city.

Before playing the first encounter, read this
introduction and the encounter carefully. It is
not necessary for you to read the entire mod-
ule before you play. The adventure will last
many nights; read only those parts you. will
play in one session.

Specularum

Specularum, the capital of the Grand Duchy
of Karameikos, is the most important city in
the area. Specularum and the Duchy are ruled
by Duke Stefan Karameikos the Third. Specu-
larum is the Duke's home, and the trading
center of his dukedom. About 50,000 people
live in or very near the city. They are farmers,
craftsmen, sailors, and traders.

The city is accessed by a port. The port is
protected on the seaward side by two long
breakwaters. A large river east of the city
allows ships to carry cargos inland to other
towns of the dukedom.

The city keeps 5,000 soldiers ready for any
emergency. The Duke also has an elite troop,
the Elvenguard, who go on special missions
and sometimes act as his bodyguard. The
entire Elvenguard often patrols the forest
lands to the north.

Just to the south of the city is the private
estate of the Duke, managed by a loyal cous-
in. This land is mostly well-tended woods and
gardens. It is surrounded by a low (15’) wall.
The Duke uses the estate as a summer palace
and hunting preserve. Anyone found on the
grounds is treated as a poacher.

Poor workers and petty thieves live just out-
side the city walls. They work outlying farms
and the Estate of Marilenev, a holding that
surrounds the city. The city itself has all stand-
ard services that the characters need; place the
service businesses wherever you wish.

The city is a crowded, noisy, unsanitary place.
It is like the medieval cities of Germany and Ita-
ly. Reading about these cities will provide infor-
mation useful in describing Specularum.

The streets are very narrow, twisting, and
dark. There is no sewage system, except for
trenches in the centers of streets. Pigs, chick-
ens, geese, and goats are not uncommon in
the poorer sections of the city.

Most buildings stand one or two stories.
They are made of dried clay brick or mud and
wattle, constructed on a wooden frame. A few
buildings are made of stone or fired brick.
Most businesses are on the ground floor, the



owner living upstairs.

Water is drawn from public wells, or from
the river when the tide is flowing out.

Crime and gangs are not uncommon. The
gangs meet near the city walls and in the
squalid sections late at night.

Running a City Adventure

Most of your adventures have occurred in
dungeons. This adventure is much different —
the action takes place in a city. Players will often
surprise you with their decisions and actions. As
they become involved in the events of this
adventure, their characters will go places and do
things that are not explained here.

Allow the characters to visit places not
shown on the maps. Have the player write
down the name of the place, its location, and
any important facts about it. If the character
returns to this place, have the player remind
you about the important details. This makes
your job easier and encourages the players to
pay attention and remember details.

Characters will also deal with NPCs that are
not detailed in the adventure. Do not panic!
Have fun with your duties as DM — take the
role of the NPC and play it like an actor. Give
these people character and emotions. Give the
players reason for remembering NPCs. Again,
if the NPC is important, have the player note
facts about him — where he can be found,
what he is like, and what he knows.

THE FAMILIES OF SPECULARUM
Encounters

This adventure is divided into a series of sepa-
rate encounters. All encounters, when linked
together and played in order, make a com-
plete adventure. The encounters are unlike
many other D&D® adventures. In these
encounters, it is likely that the players will not
always act as a group. Some of the characters
may side with one family, while others may be
drawn to another. If this happens, characters
may find themselves in conflict with each oth-
et. This is allowable; however, do not force the
player characters into situations where they
must kill each other. Allow them to escape the
situation, but do not make it easy for them.

Some encounters take place on the streets of
the city. Since the streets are narrow, muddy, and
crowded, characters move at normal dungeon
fates.

Random Encounters

There are no random encounters in this
adventure. If the characters need to find a fair-
ly common person (a street urchin, beggar,
merchant, etc.), they will not have much trou-


 

ble. If they want to find a unusual type of per-
son (a cleric, fighter, magic-user, noble, etc.),
they must go to a place where that person can
be found (a temple, for example) or spend
time and money visiting inns, markets, and
taverns asking questions. If the characters
want to find or speak to a particularly power-
ful or important person, their chances are
almost nonexistent unless they have impor-
tant information or reason.

The city has several churches, most for Law-
ful clerics. There are a few Neutral churches,
but not many people attend. There are even
Chaotic Churches; these are very secret and do
not advertise their existence in any way. If the
characters need healing or similar help, they
may obtain it if their cleric goes to his church.
Of course, the player characters are required
to make some type of offering (anything from
flowers to magic items) and may be required
to do some service for the church.

NOTE: NPC’s listed as Normal Humans have
a —1 chance to hit and a — 1 on saving throws.
They save as a 1st level Fighter.

Characters are healed 1 hit point per day of
rest. Rest means no fighting, magic using, or
more travel than within an inn (upstairs,
downstairs, etc.).

Radu

At a still-spritely 63 years, Anton Radu con-
trols his family and organization with an iron,
but hidden, hand. He is assisted by his broth-
er Cartha, his own sons Zweis and Antonito,
and their sons Theodosius, Emil and Pieter.

They are also the leaders of the secret Veiled
Society, which uses terror and crime against all
enemies. Only some members of the society
know them as its leaders.

The Radu family has many contacts in the
business and market areas of the city. Their
strong control over the waterfront and wall dis-
tricts of Specularum greatly influences the ship-
building and import/export businesses. The
Radu are attempting to gain control of the
money-lending institutions and businesses of
the city so they may dictate to the Duke.

Torenescu

Once a powerful faction controlling the every-
day business of the city, the Torenescu Family
has been weakened by the death of its leader,
Christoph Torenescu. It is currently headed by
his son Aleksandar, a youth of 26. Because of
Aleksandar’s young age an internal squab-
bling (especially between Aledsandar and his
uncle, Boris), the Torenescu family has lost
power and followers.

‘The family wants to return to its former glory.

The Torenescu still have a great deal of political
influence and discreet control of “The Hill,” the
noble district of town. Others siding with
‘Torenescu include Lady Magda, Yaros (one of the
Duke’s Privy Councillors), and “Lord” Dimitros
(the self-styled prince of beggars).

Vorloi

Considered by the other factions to be an
upstart, the Vorloi family has refused to fit the
political mold. The faction is openly controlled
by Baron Vorloi. Drawing on his resources as a
successful merchant prince, Baron Vorloi main-
tains a fleet of merchant ships in defiance of the
Radu family. He resists all their attempts to con-
trol his business (or the businesses of those who
side with him). The Torenescu are no more
pleased with the Vorloi, since the Baron refuses
to side with them simply because the Torenescu
represent nobility.

Vorloi prefers that he and those who side
with him be left alone. He has been able to
maintain privacy through his influence in the
military circles around the Duke. He hopes to
gain more power and wring important trade
concessions from the Duke. To reach this goal,
he tries to prevent open strife and silence any
bad news that might reach the Duke. Prevent-
ing any problems keeps other families from
gaining favor from the Duke.

Other members of the Vorloi faction
include the Baron's daughter Marianna, Mikel
(the Commander of the Guard Phorsis), and
Admiral Hyraskos. He also has a son, Grygori.
Unfortunately, the boy is simple-minded and
foolish, much to his father’s disgust.

THE FESTIVAL OF LUCOR

Anton Radu leaned forward, resting his bony
arms on the table. He looked carefully at the
others — Zweis, Antonito, and Cartha — try-
ing to guess their hidden doubts. “Ie is true
that Lady Magda will be in the festival?”

“Yes, father,” Zweis quickly said. “She is to
lead the Parade of Maidens from the castle.”

“The members have been informed. All
will be ready,” Cartha softly rumbled.

“And our friends, Antonito, do they sus-

we”

“My spies report nothing, Father. No one
suspects.” Antonito quickly dropped his gaze
from his father’s eyes.

“Very good. Then at the Festival of Lucor,
we will proceed.”

Entering Specularum

The player characters enter the city for the first
time. This encounter will acquaint the players
with the city and how things are done here. It



also encourages the players to join different
sides of the power struggle. Allow the players
to ask questions and learn about their sur-
roundings as they play. Be ready to create
answers to common questions: Is there an inn
nearby? How much does it cost? What time of
day is it?

 

The gate is open. A few soldiers with spears
lounge near the entrance. They wear tab-
ards of red and blue with a device of a ship
on the front. Beyond the gate is a narrow
muddy street. It is choked with people.
Most dress in their best clothes and many
wear brightly-colored outfits. Jugglers and
fire-eaters are scattered throughout the
crowd. The noise from whistles, drums,
singing, and happy chater make normal
talk difficult.

“Halt! Do you wish to enter Specu-
larum?” shouts a guard inside the gate.
“The tax is 8 silver pieces, each of you. All
but daggers must be bound with cloth.
Unbound weapons are fined. Murder by
unbound weapon is punished by confisca-
tion of property, or death for the landless.
Interference with the Duke's men gets you
prison. Treasonous activity is especially
nice — it gets you one day of slow torture
and then we draw and quarter you. So
enjoy yourselves.”

 

 

 

The guard appears quite bored. He tries to
watch the festival out of the corner of his eye
as the characters talk to him. He recites his
speech from memory, becoming interested
only when he begins talking about the pun-
ishments doled out for crimes.

The guard collects the tax from the player
characters (3 sp of the 8 goes into his pocket).
He checks all weapons to see that they are
secured. He lashes swords with thongs and
wraps spears and the like with rags. It will take
characters one round to remove the bindings
from their weapons. After binding the weap-
ons, the guard forgets about the characters
and turns his attention back to the festival.
The guard has lived here all of this life and can
answer most questions asked about the city
and what is going on.

 

Beyond the gate swirls a crowd of people.
Mud churned up by stumbling dancers
cakes on the crowd’s boots. People jostle
each other, straining for a look at acrobats,
knife-throwers, dancing bears, and min-
strels, The smells of sewage, grilled meats,
breads, sweat, and wine mingle in a
strange, but inoffensive odor.

Suddenly, the crowd sways to the sides of

 

 

 


 

 

the street. The music fades and changes to
bells and chanting. Statues carried by sev-
eral men seem to float above the heads of
the crowd. A sedan chair, borne on the
shoulders of clerics, follows.

“The procession is coming!" shouts a
young boy.

 

 

 

Advancing toward the gate is the Procession of
Lucor. The procession is a religious celebration
honoring a legendary local cleric named to the
harbor, where the statue of Lucor is floated
out to sea. Each year a woman of notable rank
and importance leads the procession. This
year Lady Magda, a member of the Torenescu
faction, has this honor.

The festival is of great importance. This fact
well suits the Radu — if the festival has prob-
lems, problems that look like they were
caused by the Torenescu supporters, the
Torenescu would be disgraced.

 

The procession stops. Something is hap-
pening at its front. Three men are arguing.
A general hush falls over the crowd as
everyone moves back from the procession.
Two men, one small, plump, and pock-
marked and the other tall and lean, are
arguing with the lead bearer of the sedan
chair.

Angrily,the small, plump man says to
the lead bearer, ‘‘Bald-headed fool, do you
Torenescu think you own the street?
There's space for all of us, without your
ape-like behavior!”

The lead bearer comtemptuously waves
a rod in the small man's face. “Out of the
way of the Procession of Lucor, Radu rab-
ble!”

The tall, lean man, spitting on the
statue of Lucor says, ““That old fool? You
make me laugh!”

The lead bearer strikes the tall man,
knocking him into the filth. The smaller
man tenses, ready to lunge.

 

 

 

If the player characters act, they can prevent
violence. If they favor the two men, the Radu
seek their following. If they side with the
bearer, they are sought by Torenescu sup-
porters. Stories of the incident circulate the
city. If the characters continue to watch with-
out becoming involved, two men in green liv-
ery break up the argument and pacify both
sides. These men are Vorloi servants.

After this scene, the characters can learn more
about the families by asking any of the people
there. Some will reply neutrally, while others
fiercely support one faction or the other. Once
the incident is over, the procession moves on.

Finding a Room

When the characters decide to get rooms
(remind them by asking where they intend to
sleep), they find all inns very crowded. Wher-
ever they ask, only one room is available, a
tiny thing that cannot hold more that 3 peo-
ple. If they want it, they may have the room
for 1 gold piece per person. Point out that oth-
er characters might be able to get a room for
everyone, but it means that several characters
must sleep at another inn. If the characters
refuse to take any rooms, they must spend the
night sleeping in the mud of the streets.

When the characters pay for their rooms,
tell one of the characters that some of his
money is missing. He has been pickpocketed.
Not much should be missing, only enough to
remind the characters to be careful.

During the evening, one of the following
events will happen to each player character or
group of characters. If possible, do not have the
same event happen to all the characters. The first
event should be used for fighter and strong-
looking characters, the second for thieves or a
character standing outside the inn.

First Event

Read the following to strong-looking charac-
ters as they relax inside an inn.

 

The citizens have finally slowed their cele-
bration of the festival, although it has tak-
en much time, food, and strong drink.
From nearby in this smoky common room
comes a loud, tipsy voice.

A scarred man points. “Hey you there!
‘Want some work? Here, sit and drink. I
need strong bodies. Theosius is my name.
You look brave. Do you want to earn

 

 

money?”

 

Theosius explains that he is looking for trust-
worthy people to perform occasional duties for
him. None of the missions involve doing any-
thing illegal, but there may be danger
involved. He will press very hard to get the
player characters to seal the bargain. If they
do, as a sign of good faith, Theosius gives each
player character who agrees 3 gp. He will get
in contact with them when they are needed.
(Theosius will attempt to contact the players
in the “EMPLOYMENT” section.)

Theosius works for the Torenescu and so do
any player characters working for him. If the
player characters ask about him, they learn
that Theosius is a respected wood sculptor and
craftsman in the city. It is known that he does a
great deal of work for the nobles of the city,
and it is rumored he has a small hoard of
money.



Second Event

Read the following to a thief or character
standing just outside the inn.

 

Outside the inn, a man walks by. He lurch-
es drunkenly along. He smiles and nods as
he passes. Suddenly, three hooded men
step out of the shadows and the drunken
man turns around. None of the men carry
weapons openly.

“So, new to town, he?” asks the drunk-
en man, who now appears quite sober.
“You look like you need some work. Now,
we have some things that need to be done
and you look fairly smart. I’m sure you
would want to help us. You staying here?”
he asks, pointing to the inn. “Be a real
good idea if you didn’t leave for a while.
We'll see you tomorrow night. Here,
catch,” he says. He throws a small bag.

With that, the men slip into the
shadows and run away. The bag holds 20
gold pieces.

 

 

 

The men are members of the Veiled Society of
the Radu. If attacked, they immediately run.
However, the Veiled Society will treat the
player characters as enemies from then on. If
the characters ask about these men. NPCs
answer evasively. The people do not like talk-
ing about the hooded men. If they ask the
innkeeper, he explains, that he has a quiet
business and likes the idea of it staying quiet.
He doesn’t create trouble and no one creates
trouble for him.

If the characters attempt to go to the
authorities, it does not help them. City offi-
cials will shuttle the player characters to differ-
ent officials — the magistrate sends them to
the warden, the warden to the constabulary,
the constabulary to the bailiff, the bailiff to
the magistrate, etc. The PCs will not fin help
— not because of fear, but because of
bureaucracy, protection, and bribes. None of
the officials are evil.

After meeting the members of the Veiled
Society, the player characters are watched dis-
cteetly by the innkeeper, merchants, and
members of the Society. If a player wishes to
determine if the party is being watched, have
him roll 1 d6 and add all wisdom bonuses. He
notices someone watching if the result is 5 or
higher. The player characters can attempt to
lose anybody trailing them, but will not know
if they succeed. They will not succeed.

UNDER THE FLOORS

Zweis nervously looked at the others around
the table. Antonito casually studied his fin-
getnails. Anton, hunched beside a candle,


 

flipped through papers. “Zweis looks a bit
uncomfortable,” thought Cartha. “Good.”

“So, it didn’t work as you planned,” Anton
said, fixing a sharp eye on Zweis. “A feeble plan
and it didn’t work. What do we do now?”

“Make a statement,” Antonito said, grinning.
“A knife in the night would teach the Vorloi
peach-makers a lot. The members are impatient.
They want to act, no more little work.”

Anton looked at him calmly, “I then
assume you would lead them? We must be
cautious. There will be no more mistakes.
Cartha, what do you say?”

“No, we cannot” said Anton finally. “It is too
soon. There is no more to say. Goodnight, see
yourselves out.” Anton stood and held out a
trembling arm to Zweis. The younger man took
it and they both shuffled out of the room.

“Well, what do you feel in your heart?”
asked Cartha. “The merchant Fortunato is
where I would start, Antonito.”

Antonito looked to the closed door. “I
agree. When shall it be done?”

At the Inn

If the characters gather at one inn the next
morning, read the following. If the group
does not gather in one place, read the follow-
ing to either group.

 

It is morning at the inn. A cat stalks some-
thing in the corner of the room. The inn-
keeper's daughter sweeps last night's
dinner off the floor. From the back comes
the clicking of dishes and the splash of
water. A traveller snores loudly in the cor-
ner. Suddenly, the door swings open and
an elderly lady frantically looks about.
“Please, some kind sir, come quick to
help me!” she pleads, panic overcoming
her. She looks about for anyone to answer
her. “Oh save me! There are demons in my
house, I know it! I hear them at night talk-
ing to each other. They want to catch me
please!” she says, falling to her knees.
The innkeeper runs in, kneels beside the
old woman, and tries to comfort her.
“Goodwife Thanato,” he says, sounding
concerned, “what are you doing? Sit down
proper.” He turns, saying, “Could anyone
help this poor old woman? Could anyone
look in her cellar to find the problem?”

 

 

 

If the party does not ignore the hysterical
woman, she clings to them, telling her story.
Something, she swears, is in her root cellar.
She can hear it moving about — sometimes
during the day, but mostly at night. Things
are moved and food is missing. Just minutes
ago was the worst. This time she heard voices
and they were calling to her. She begs for the

party's help. Behind her, the innkeeper qui-
etly holds up a gold piece and points to it.

If the party still refuses to help, the innkeeper
leads one character aside. “I'll throw you into
the street, heartless dogs, and spread your names
as debtors to all the inns in the city, too, if you
don’t calm this old lady’s nerves! Don’t think
my guild can’t make you miserable.”

The old woman leads the characters to a house
a few feet away from the inn. She shows them
the entrance to her root cellar. It is a trapdoor at
the back of the kitchen, beside the brick and
plaster oven. She refuses to go any further.

1. Under A Garden

 

A large earthen cavern is covered with a
pool of ankle-deep mud. The room is criss-
crossed with supporting beams and planks
cover the roof. Large blobs of mud seep
down between the cracks. Across the
chamber, three thin and naked men shovel
by the light of a feeble lantern. Three ugly,
armored creatures watch them work.

 

 

 

If the characters enter the chamber, one of the
workers drops his shovel and runs toward the
characters. The hobgoblins shout foul curses
at the characters and charge.

Hobgoblins (3): AC 6; HD 1+1; hp 7 each;
MV 30’; #AT 1; D 1-8; Save Fl; ML 8; AL
C; carry 5 sp each

If the characters defeat the hobgoblins, the
naked men rush forward and fall at the charac-
ters’ feet and thank them profusely. The men
were captured almost a year ago and have
been digging tunnels under the city ever
since. The naked men do not fight, but do not
leave the characters until the party goes to the
surface again.

2. Fortunato’s Cellar

 

A light wooden panel covers a dimly lit cel-
lar. The air is dry and smells of meats.
Cured hams and sausages hang from the
beams. In the center of the cellar, two
hooded men busily dig up the floor. A
large bundle lies nearby.

“Come on,” says one man. “I think this
is deep enough. Let's get it buried and go.”

“No,” says the second man. “I want to
make it deeper. Nobody can ever find this

 

 

but us.”

 

If the men are not disturbed, they dig a little
more and load the bundle into the hole. They
fill the hold with dirt, move some items over
the spot, and then leave the cellar. If the play-



ers reveal themselves, the two men attempt to
flee. In the bundle is the body of a young
woman, recently murdered. See “The Investi-
gation,” for information about the woman
and the house above.

The men advise the characters to release
them, if captured. Otherwise, they say, mem-
bers of the Veiled Society will harm them.
Lawful characters should not allow the men to
be murdered. They must turn the murderers
in or suffer an alignment change to Chaotic.

Two men (3rd level thieves): AC 7; MV 40’;

T3; hp 8, 7; #AT 1; D 1-8; Save T3; ML 6,
10 during questioning; AL C

3. Kobold Exploration Party

 

This dug-out cave is dimly lit by torches.
From the cave comes the sounds of several
creatures. In the middle of the room is a
group of kobolds struggling to place a
wooden support beam. One turns toward
you and begins to jibber. The beam slips a
few inches and a small hail of dirt falls over
the room and the kobolds.

The tunnel to the room collapses in bil-
lows of choking dust. One of the kobolds
hisses in common. “Come help us, or we
will all be trapped!”

 

 

 

If the characters assist, the kobolds let go of the
beam when the characters approach. A success-
ful initiative roll allows the characters to grab the
beam. If they are unable to grab the beam, the
ceiling collapses, doing 1 hp of damage to each
PC. The characters can free themselves from the
rubble in one round. The kobolds attack while
the characters cannot fight back.

The cave-in behind the characters can be
dug clear in one turn. Near the beam are sev-
eral kobold-sized tools, a bag of spoiled food,
and a small pouch containing 5 gp.

Kobolds (10): AC 7; MV 30’; HD 1/2; hp 2
each; #AT 1; D 1-4; Save NM; ML6; ALC

4. Refuse Pit

 

This small side passage reeks of foul odor.
The walls are slimy and oozing.

A sudden scraping noise is followed by a
loud, wet plop. A wave of sulphurous
fumes fills the passage.

 

 

 

The characters find themselves knee-deep in rot-
ting, runny garbage from an inn. An old cistern
above the room has collapsed. There is now a
hole in the ceiling where it has collapsed.


5. The Goodwife’s Cellar

 

At the bottom of the ladder is a dry dirt
cellar. Bags are piled against the walls, and
cobwebs fill the corners. A sack of dried
apples is spilled across the floor.

A squeaking and scratching noise comes
from the southeast corner.

 

 

 

If the party turns to look, they see a big rat run
along the wall and scuttle out of sight. If the
characters follow, they see a shadow move in
the southwest corner of the root cellar. Careful
investigation of the corner reveals a hidden
entrance to a small passage. Characters taller
than a halfling must stoop to use the passage.

 

A clattering noise and whispery sounds fill

 

 

the room, but there is no apparent source.

 

If the characters listen carefully while moving
about, they find it is loudest in the northwest
corner. Careful examination reveals another
small passage behind a sack of grain. Charac-
ters taller than a halfling must stoop to use

passage, also.
6. The Unburied Dead

 

This chamber was apparently once the cel-
lar of a house. It is now choked with rub-
ble, burned beams, and dirt. Several paths
can be carefully picked across the room.
A chuckling sound continually echoes
throughout the room. A glowing light, tak-
ing the vague form of a person, floats about
the room. It passes through beams. The
sound seems to come from it. The form

passes through a wall and disappears from

 

 

sight.

 

If the characters search the rubble, they find
pieces of bone, perhaps once a person. As
soon as the bone is found, the glowing light
and laughter comes again. Whether the char-
acters strike at the light or not, it does not
harm them. Hidden under a loose beam, in a
charred box, are 3 pieces of half-melted jew-
elry worth 200 gp each.

 

A faint sliding sound follows a loud snap-

 

 

ping.

 

The legs of three characters (determine ran-
domly) are grasped. Roll for surprise. The
gripped characters are thrown to the floor as
three zombies burst up from the rubble-
covered floor.

Zombies (3): AC 8; MV 30’; HD 2; hp 5 each;
#AT 1; D 1-8; Save Fl; ML 12; ALC

7. Turano’s Cellar

 

Along the south wall of this cellar is a large
pile of dirt. Near the open tunnel mouth is
a small wheelbarrow. It is loaded with
shovels and picks. Wooden beams are piled
neatly in the center of the room. In the
southeast corner is a ladder leading to a
trapdoor in the ceiling.

There is a scraping of wood on wood. A
ray of light shines into the room from a
crack in the ceiling. Someone is opening
the trapdoor.

 

 

 

A hooded man comes down the ladder. He is
not expecting anyone, but notices characters
in plain sight. If he notices the characters, he
flees. If not, he takes a shovel and goes up the
tunnel to room 2. He is a member of the Veil-
ed Society. He knows the tunnels are being
dug to enter the houses of their enemies. See
“The Investigation,” for information about
the building above.

Fighter(1)(2nd level): AC 5; MV 40’; F2; hp
12; #AT 1; D 1-8; Save F2; ML 8; AL C;
carries 20 gp

INVESTIGATION

If the characters discover the murdered wom-
an and report it to the authorities, they are
held for questioning. The characters have no
difficulty proving their innocence if they agree
to an examination by a clerical tribunal. If the
characters do not agree, they are considered
guilty and hanged in a week.

If the murder is not reported, a servant of
the Vorloi house discovers it the same day. He
finds the tunnel leading to the widow's base-
ment. The widow tells about having the char-
acters investigate and their descriptions are
circulated. If the characters do nothing spe-
cial, they are arrested immediately. They can
prove their innocence as explained above. If
the characters hide, they are contacted by
members of the Veiled Society. They offer
food, shelter, and safety in return for service.

The murdered woman is Lucia Vorloi, a
niece of Baron Vorloi. It is said she spurned
the advances of Stephanos Torenescu, rudely
insulting him for his pompous and conceited
behavior. Examining the body shows the
woman was strangled from behind, possibly
by a rope or thick cord. She has no other inju-
ries on her body. Under her fingernails are a
few strands of red hair Lucia Vorloi is blond.
Stephanos has light brown hair. On her right



check and palm is dried blood.

After proving their innocence, the charac-
ters are ordered to accompany a tribune (a
high level fighter) to the scene of the crime.
With them are two important clerics of the
city. They start by going to the Vorloi House.

Vorloi House

A well-to-do merchant, Fortunato Vorloi, and
his daughter Lucia live here. Fortunato has
been at sea for several weeks now. The house is
empty. Inside there are signs of violence — a
dagger and bloodstains on the floor, broken
dishes and furniture, and torn clothing.

Several drops of a brownish liquid are scat-
tered amongst the bloodstains. If the liquid is
tasted, it proves to be a particularly strong
type of wine. Several items of value (jewelry,
money, etc.) are obviously missing. None of it
is traceable.

If the characters carefully examine the
bloodstains, they find a small section where
the stain seems to have been rubbed away.
Something may have been written there. It is
hard to tell but the letters could be BAD . . .,
BAO...,RAD...,RAO... The message is
obviously incomplete.

The daggger is crusted with dried blood. A
few strands of red hair are dried in the blood.
Near the cellar entrance is a signet ring of the
Torenescu family. A short length of blood-
stained hemp rope lies near the trapdoor.
Careful examination by a character looking for
clues reveals small bits of pitch stuck to the
rungs of the ladder.

Turano’s Guest House

This house is deserted, although someone was
living here recently. It is a small building at
the rear of a larger house owned by Turano, a
butcher. He rented the house to a man named
Skevlos, a black-haired, portly young man
who was a travelling blacksmith. Skevlos left
the house the day before.

The small house has no furnishing other than
an old bed, a desk, and one chair. Muddy tracks
on the floor lead to a trapdoor. On the desk is a
near-empty bottle containing a thick brownish,
sweet, strong wine. There is no label on the bot-
tle, but near the top is the remains of a wax seal.
This seal still clearly bears the imprint of the
‘Trouscan Estates. Anyone in the city can identify
the seal, even though the Trouscan Estate is not
local. All wines from there are sold to a few
waterfront inns. In the desk is a black leather
hood. Strands of red hair can be found inside the
hood.

The trap door leads to a cellar. Digging imple-
ments, beams, and piles of dirt cover the cellar
floor. The tunnel entrance is collapsed but the


 

secret entrance is not. In one corner of the
room is a mound of bloody bandages. Slipped
down between the beams is a roll of parch-
ment, a map of this area of the city. Several
buildings have crosses marked on them.
Marked are this house, Fortunato’s house, the
Rattlebone Inn, Zweis Radu’s house, and Bar-
on Vorloi’s guest house. A careful search of
these places shows that no tunnels exist other
than those already found by the PCs.

The Actual Events

Lucia Fortunato was alone in her father's
house. Late at night, two members of the Veil-
ed Society, acting under Antonio’s orders,
entered the house through the cellar to kill
Lucia. They made noise moving about the
first floor, awakening Lucia. She came down
to investigate and discovered the men. Seeing
them, she attempted to escape and get help.
The men caught her. She slashed one with a
dagger she carried. While she was fighting
him, the other got behind her and strangled
her with the rope. The two men fled in panic,
leaving her lifeless body on the floor. Antoni-
to, on hearing their report, ordered them to
return to the house and dispose of the body.
The two men were recruited from the wharf
area of the city. One man was a ship builder
and left faint traces of pitch on the ladder. The
ted hairs were from the man Lucia slashed.

RIOT

Cartha looked hard at Antonito, who sat smiling
confidently. “I'll be all right,” Cartha thought,
“so long as that worthless rat of a nephew keeps
his mouth shut. The little fool doesn’t even real-
ize the trouble he's in. I do not need to concer
myself with Zweis for now.”

Cartha watched as Anton leaned back in his
chair. “My god,” thought Cartha, “he’s smil-
ing. Does he approve of Antonito? What's he
up to? Well, I best find out.” Cartha glared at
Anton and finally said, “So brother, you
called us here. Please explain. I’m very busy.”

“T will get to you in due time, Cartha,”
Anton said pleasantly. “First, I would like to
talk about Antonito.”

“Antonito is still smiling,” thought Cartha.
“What is he up to?”

At the mention of his name, Antonito’s
smile wavered a little. “Ah, now he's wor-
ried,” Cartha decided. ‘Good. Maybe brother
dear will crush him. That would suit me well.”

“‘Antonito, there was a killing a few nights
ago. Did you know that?” Anton leaned for-
ward.

“Yes, father, I heard.”

“Ah, you heard. Indeed, I'm sure you did.
Are you such a fool to think that I would not

know! Only because you are my son do you sit
here! Only because you are my son will you
walk out of here today! You may have ruined
our plans. Now we must fix your mess.”

Anton turned to Cartha. “What about
you?” Cartha flinched, thinking he was
doomed. ‘Can you correct my headstrong
son's error?”

“He doesn't suspect me. Maybe I can con-
vince him to do what I want,” Cartha thought.

“Anton, there may be those who will talk,”
said Cartha. “They must be found and dealt
with. Then there are others asking questions.
The authorities we can satisfy, but others may
dig too deeply. This must be prevented. And
attention must be diverted from the Society.
Let us do what we can to stir up trouble for the
Torenescu.”

Anton leaned back, the tension slowly leav-
ing his face. “Good,” thought Cartha, “‘he’s
thinking about it. Go with it, Anton, do what
I want you to.” He forced a small smile. “‘Now
with Zweis and Antonito in shame, you will
depend more and more on me,” he said to
himself.

“Yes, Cartha,” agreed Anton. “Antonito, try
to redeem yourself. Find the killers and deal
with them. Zweis, the public must be made
aware of the threat the Torenescu poses to their
safety. Spread the word to them. Cartha, you
will deal with those who ask too many questions.
I want no more inquisitive noses.” Anton stood
and padded slowly out of the room.

Across the table Antonito glared at Cartha,
his eyes showing his hate.

The Mood in the Streets

If the characters proceed with their investiga-
tion, they notice a growing mood in the city
— hotheads speak out against the actions of
the Torenescu family. They are quick to blame
the Torenescu for the murder of Lucia Vorloi.
Some even accuse the Torenescu of being the
masterminds behind the Veiled Society.

These hotheads become bolder as time
passes. They start by talking among friends in
inns and taverns, and proceed to gather small
groups of people. Their voices become louder
and stronger as more people listen to them.

By the end of the day, the speakers become
quite bold. Not only do they connect the
Torenescu with the murder, they also play on
the common folk’s dislike of the nobility,
which the Torenescu represent.

As the characters cross a marketplace to
return to their inns sometime before nightfall,
read the following:

 

It is late in the afternoon. Most of the stalls
have closed for the day, but many people

 

 

 



 

are still in the market. An orator stands on
the edge of the central fountain. The
crowd gathers around him.

The orator shouts, “And I tell you, these
Torenescu are dangerous. Do they care for
you? Do they care for the safety of com-
mon workers? Who declares the taxes?
Who steals food from your children’s
mouths to fatten themselves in luxury?”

The crowd is getting restless. Several
men shout cries of agreement. Men raise
their fists and their voices grow in number.
The speaker attracts more and more people
— some merely curious and others in
agreement with him.

The clatter of horse hooves makes the
crowd turn.

Ringing the outer edges of the market-
place are 30 of the Duke’s horsemen. The
orator and the crowd glow silent. Three
riders slowly bring their mounts toward the
center of the crowd. Suddenly, a hoarse cry
erupts from the crowd and something
flashes through the air. The lead rider falls,
struck by a rock.

 

 

 

Allow the player characters to move to the
edge of the crowd, if they wish. They are not
allowed to cross the line of horsemen. After
the rider falls, there is total silence for a sec-
ond. Then the crowd surges at the riders. The
riders respond by drawing swords and charg-
ing. As soon as they charge, their line is bro-
ken and the characters can attempt to escape.

The commoners take up poles, rocks, rotten
fruit, and daggers. A vicious riot breaks out. The
horsemen hit the crowd, blindly slashing with
their sabers. The people respond, swinging sticks
and hurling stones. Horses, dragged down by
the weight of clinging peasants, fall with fright-
ened screams. Women, children, and men run
in panic from the charging riders.

If a character attempts to escape without
fighting there is a 30% chance a horseman
attacks him. The character can continue to
move and escape, even if hit.

If the character stays to fight, two more hor-
semen arrive in the next two rounds to assist.
If these horsemen are defeated, the characters
and the crowd are not bothered by any other
riders. After defeating the horsemen, the
characters are swept up by the commoners and
hailed as heroes of the common people. The
characters must think and speak quickly to
avoid becoming the leaders of the rioters.

Horsemen: AC 6; MV 40’ (on foot); F1; hp 4;
#AT 1; D 1-8; Save NM; ML 9; ALL

The horses have AC 7, HD 2, 9 hp and move

80’. Six characters working together can pull

down one horse and rider.


 

Escape

If the characters break free of the horsemen
and the riot, they can run down any street they
wish. All public buildings (inns, shops, etc.)
on the market square are closed and shut-
tered. The characters see the orator running
down a side street. No matter what street they
go down, use the Riot Map.

If the characters do not follow the orator, they
encounter a line of 15 soldiers with polearms
and an officer halfway down the street. The
soldiers advance in an even line, turning back
any who try to pass. The same thing happens
on all streets leading to the market.

A young woman lets the characters in if
they pound on a door. She hides them until
the soldiers pass. While they are hiding, the
characters hear shouting, screams, the occa-
sional noises of fighting, and the harsh cries of
orders. The air is stale and smoky. After sev-
eral hours, Coelina (the young woman) tells
the characters that all is clear. They can then
move on the streets again without fear of sol-
diers. The area of the riot is very still. The dim
glow of fires rises from that area.

Soldiers: AC 6; MV 40‘; HD 1; hp 4; #AT 1;D
1-10; Save NM; ML 8; ALL

The soldiers fight whoever tries to break
through their line.

If the characters follow the orator, he ducks
into a small hovel halfway down the street.
The door slams behind him. Ahead the char-
acters can see the 15 soldiers with polearms
advancing (statistics above).

The door is barred, but any two characters
can break it down. Inside is a bare room (no
map required) with a trapdoor in the center of
the floor. The trapdoor opens easily. It drops
down 10’ and becomes a passage running
roughly northwest. Far down the passage, a
bobbing glimmer of light disappers. The tun-
nel extends for 300 feet before ending ina lad-
der leading up.

The ladder leads to a room similar to the
other entrance. If the characters pursue quick-
ly, they catch the orator in this room attempt-
ing to drag a large chest over the trapdoor. If
the characters try to capture him, he resists,
but if they wound him he immediately sur-
renders. Totally panicked, he tells the charac-
ters anything he knows, if they ask.

He is a member of the Veiled Society. He
was to stir up trouble for the Torenescu by
making speeches against them. He does not
know who leads the Veiled Society. The Veiled
Society meets in an underground chamber.
There is a secret entrance in the Blue Water
Mead Hall near the waterfront. This is the

only entrance he knows about. He is sure there
are others.

There are normally 20 members present at
the meetings he attends. All members are
hooded and robed with clothing provided
shortly after entering. He provides the charac-
ters with a rough map of the layout, but
unknown to them it is incorrect. Use the
Chambers section of the Map 5 to prepare a
rough sketch for the players, but leave out
some key details (secret doors, passages, etc.).
He knows there is a meeting tomorrow night.

Also, he knows the names of Lucia’s mur-
derers — Akarios the Shipwright and Zacha-
tiah Boestes. If asked, he tells the characters to
look at the Blue Water Mead Hall for them.

Orator (2nd level thief): AC 9; MV 40’; T2;
hp 6; #AT 1; D 1-4; Save T2; ML 6; ALC

He carries 200 gp, his pay for rabble-rousing.

Leading the Riot

If the characters stay with the rioters, the com-
moners make them the military leaders of the
riot. In the initial fight, the thirty horsemen
were defeated. The commoners loot the
bodies. The characters may commandeer the
horses if they wish.

Meanwhile, other commoners gather stones,
throw bricks at nearby buildings, and collect
wood for fires. If the characters attempt to
impose order on the crowd, a large viscious-
looking thug challenges them. Waving his saber,
he demands a fight with one of the characters.
The longer the characters let him talk, the more
support he gets from the crowd.

Thug (3rd level fighter): AC 7; MV 40’; F3;
hp 14; #AT 1; D 1-8+2; Save F3; ML 12;
ALC

He does not fight fair, using any dirty trick in
the book he can get away with.

Fifteen rounds after the characters defeat
the horsemen, 60 armed soldiers with
polearms arrive at the square. They have
orders to stop the revolt by capturing or killing
those involved. The characters have 100 poor-
ly armed rioters on their side. If anyone is cap-
tured (including the characters), they are
treated as traitors — slow torture followed by
drawing and quartering. There is no appeal.

However, the characters do have a chance to
fight their way out of the situation. If they
decide to make an attack on the soldiers, do
not try to fight the entire combat. Instead, use
the system below:

1. Have the characters describe how they want
the commoners to attack. (Charge the men



guarding this street; fifty men attack here
while the rest protect the sides and rear, etc.)
Have them write it down in the order that it
will happen.
2. Have the character with the highest Cha-
tisma roll 1-3 and add or subtract his Cha-
risma adjustment. This is the number of
commands followed by the people.
3. Let the characters decide where they will be.
In the front ranks, they are attacked by two
soldiers each. If in the rear, they are not
attacked, but the commoners do not fight as
effectively.
4. Have the players roll two dice for a morale
check for the commoners. The morale of the
commoners is 9.
5. Roll two dice. If the characters fight in the
front rank, add two; if not, subtract 1. if the
characters made a plan and the commoners fol-
low all of it, add two. If the commoners follow
some but not all of the plan, add one. If the
characters did not make a plan, subtract 3. If
commoners fail their morale check, subtract 2.

If the modified die roll is 5 or greater, the
commoners have won the fight. There are no
surviving soldiers present and only 20 com-
moners remain.

If the commoners lose the fight (a die roll of
4 or lower), the characters can still escape by
fighting. The characters must defeat 10 sol-
diers before an escape route is open and they
may flee. However, vague descriptions of
them are sent throughout the city by criers.

Soldiers: AC 6; MV 40’; F1; hp 4; #AT 1; D 1-
10; Save NM; ML 9; ALL

After the Riot

If the characters decide to leave the market-
place after defeating the soldiers, they can
leave in the general confusion. If they want to
continue as leaders, they must flee as quickly
as possible. Each turn ten soldiers arrive. The
characters can recruit five commoners each
turn, up toa total of 1,000. No more than 400
soldiers arrive. However, the player characters
can never command more than 100 rioters.
The others run rampant, looting, burning
buildings and causing much destruction. The
soldiers stay organized and fight savagely.
They protect the Duke's castle at all costs. The
Duke also has access to higher-level magic.
Describe the scene as general confusion —
fireballs, screaming, buildings burning, etc.
Allow the players to continue as long as they
like, but make it clear that they will not win in
the long run. Other rioters challenge their
authority and the players will have little control.
The Duke immediately begins gathering
troops from the surrounding area. By the next
day, he has 2,000 men ready to enter the city.


 

Anyone still rioting or suspected of rioting is
killed.

EMPLOYMENT

As the second day wears on, the tensions of the
riot slowly subside. The tensions are not gone,
only hidden, and waiting for a new spark. The
mood in the city that evening is grim.

Read the following section to player charac-
ters hired by Theosius (of the Torenescu fac-
tion) when they return to their inn.

 

Back at the inn, the innkeeper calls out,
“Excuse me, but a gentleman called for
you while you were out. He gave me a mes-
sage, let’s see. Uh, you were to goto. . . It
was to go someplace and get a package,
that I know. The Senator Eipistlo's house,
that’s where you're to take it. Ah, from the
Jade Sea, a boat down at the wharf. And
there was a warning, too, gentlemen? He
said that there were those who would try to
take what you carried.”

 

Characters contacted by the Veiled Society
receive the following message as they are out
on the streets.

 

From somewhere along the street comes a
whistling noise and a loud thunk. Quiver-
ing in the wall nearby is a dagger. A shad-
owy figure slips into the crowd and is gone.
A note tied to the dagger reads: Be at Vin-
ter’s Lane tonight before the second bell.
Go to the wine shop on the corner. Be
ready. Do not fail. The next message will
be more pointed.

 

The following encounter is for the characters
headed for the “Jade Sea”.

 

The “Jade Sea” is finally visible ahead. It is
late. The sun has set and the remaining
dusklight is filtering out of the sky. The sea
wall and the city are behind. The deck-
hand, a wizened old man, does not look
friendly.

He snaps in a screechy voice, “What do
you want? Who sent you here?”

 

 

 

 

Whether the party answers him honestly or
not, his mood changes and he becomes very
helpful.

 

The old man scampers off. In a few min-
utes he returns with another man. The
deckhand grins and nods.

“Here's your package, mateys! Hee-hee,

 

 

have fun, y’lubbers!”

 

“Tam Simion Torenescu,” says the other
man. “I am a statesman. It is important
that I reach the Senator's house in secrecy.
Since you are new to town, you will not
draw the attention his bodyguards would.
Will you help?”

Suddenly, a number of ragged-looking
men approach the base of the gangplank.
The men carry swords and clubs, but do
not raise them. One man steps forward
and kneels on one knee.

In a slightly mocking tone he says, “Oh
Lord Simion, our sovereign master Prince
Dimitrios, Ruler of the Beggars, sends us
as his solemn oath of homage to the
Torenescu. Receive us into your service.”

At this, Simion laughs uproariously,
clapping his hands and stamping his feet.

“Well said, dog of a beggar,” says
Simion. “And so you shall join my body-
guard!”

 

 

 

If the characters try to advise Simion against
taking these men on, he does not listen to
them. Statistics for these men follow “The
Ambush” section.

The party may recommend any route
through the city they wish. Simion wishes to
reach the Senator's house as quickly as possi-
ble but settles for a reasonable compromise.
He has a map of the city. Allow the players to
see the city map if you wish. There are Veiled
Society spies on each road.

Veiled Society Men

When the characters contacted by the Veiled
Society reach Vinter's Lane, read the following
encounter.

 

Vinter's Lane is a dark and lonely place this
late at night. The lane is narrow and foul,
like most of the smaller streets of the city.
Small tented booths and little shops line
both sides. The air smells heavy of yeast
and wine. Ahead, a lantern shines outside
a small booth, It is the only place that is
open. The banner along the side says,
“Aristo, Wine Merchant.”

The only person in the booth is a fat,
sweaty old man of about 60. Around him
are bottles and jugs of wine. The air has a
sour-sweet smell.

“Gentlemen, you have chosen well to
come to me,” says the man in the booth.
“I, Aristo, am the finest dealer of wines in
the city! What would you . . .” He stops in
a fit of coughing and hacking.

Before he can continue, 10 men appear,

 

 

 



five at each end of the street. They all wear
black hoods. They stop 10’ away from the
booth.

 

If the characters do nothing, one approaches.

 

“Here,” says the hooded man, holding
something out. ‘Take these and put them
on. You are armed? Then come with us
quickly.”

 

 

 

The men wait for the characters to join them and
then lead them through many twisting alleys to
a dark street corner. Here a hooded man, possi-
bly the same one, turns to the characters.

 

“You are now one of us,” says the man. “If
they catch you, they kill you. If you betray
us, we kill you. Act in our name but with-
out our blessing, we kill you. Work hard
for us and you will prosper. Once with us
you cannot leave us.”

A boy runs up to the group and speaks
to one of the men. At his word the group
runs through the twisting alleys. The
group arrives at a section of a street. They
throw hoods over the street lamps. The
leader of the group motions the men into
three different positions.

 

 

 

The Ambush

The points marked by an “X” on the Ambush
Map are the three points where the Veiled
Society men are located. Allow the characters
involved with the Veiled Society to select
where they will place themselves. With them
are five other members of the Veiled Society.

Play this part of the encounter in two separate
groups — one group of characters acting as
bodyguards and the other group as Veiled
Society men. Each group should not be
allowed to hear what is said to the other or to
know what its members are doing. If this is
not possible, do not allow player characters on
one side of the fight to take actions based on
information known only to the other side.

Simion, the 10 beggars, and the player
character bodyguards enter the street from the
north end. The group may be arranged how-
ever, the players want, so long as Simion is
protected.

The Veiled Society player characters receive
orders to be ready to attack on the leader's sig-
nal. They must attempt to capture or kill
Simion. He must not be allowed to try to
make peace among the factions. A good
description is given of Simion. Simion is the
only one that matters. The characters may


 

deal with with others as they see fit.

When the bodyguard reaches the middle of
the street, the Veiled Society attacks. All
attacks made by the Society members are
intended to reach and kill Simion. If possible,
they avoid fighting other characters (NPC or
player). Unless the characters have made prep-
arations, it takes them one round to remove
their bindings. All NPCs use fake bindings
that can be removed without loss of a round.

Simion: AC 9; MV 40’; HD 1; hp 5; #AT 1; D
1-4; Save NM; ML 9; ALL

Beggars (10) (1st level thieves): AC7; MV 40’;
HD 1; hp 3; #AT 1; D 1-4 or 1-8; Save T1;
ML 6; ALN

Veiled Society Men (15) (1st level fighters):
AC 4; MV 40’; F1; hp 5; #AT 1; D 1-4 or 1-
8; Save Fl; ML 9; ALC

If the characters capture any of the men, they

have one chance to break his morale. If any are

successful, the member says that a red haired

man hired them. No one knows this man.

Veiled Society Leader (3rd level cleric): AC 3;
MV 40’; C3; hp 13; #AT 1 at +3; D 1-
6 +3; Save C3; ML 10; AL C; Spells light,
protection from evil; Magic Items mace
+1, gauntlets of ogre power

If captured, this man makes a show of resist-
ing and then apparently breaks down. His
name is Flaviare. He has red hair. He “‘con-
fesses” that the Torenescu hired him to kill
Lucia, and that they control the Veiled Socie-
ty. But he is not the murderer. He has no
wounds other than those he may have
obtained struggling with the PCs.

At the end of the fight, if Simion is still
alive, he continues to the Senator's house. The
characters escorting Simion are paid 500 gp
each and sent away.

If the Veiled Society kills Simion, those
characters will be paid only 200 gp each. They
are told they will be contacted as needed.

FURTHER INVESTIGATION

After the ambush the characters can continue
the investigation into Lucia Vorloi’s murderer.
They should have several clues to work with.
Each clue and where it leads is listed below.

Red Hair: These are hairs from one of the two
attackers. Red hair was found under Lucia’s
fingernails and dried in the blood of the dag-
ger she used on one of her attackers. More was
found in a black hood lying in Turano’s guest
house. As a clue it does not provide much
information to the characters, but it will help
them identify one of the men. No one in the

Torenescu family has red hair. No one in the
Radu or Vorloi families has red hair.

Pitch: This is common-naval pitch used in
sealing boats. Some pitch was found on the
rungs of the ladder leading to the cellar. The
characters can check for places that have or sell
pitch. There are 4 major suppliers, all down
on the waterfront. All have seen at some point
ared-haired man. They all sell pitch to anyone
who wants it — fishermen, boatbuilders,
housewives, etc.

Blood: The blood is from the red-haired
attacker. Characters may be able to deduce
this because the hairs were found mingled
with the blood. The red-haired man has been
injured badly as indicated by the amount of
dried blood found in the Vorloi house. The
injured man left no trail of blood.

Ring: The ring is a false clue, planted by the
attackers when they returned. If presented to
the Torenescu, it takes them a day to deter-
mine who it belongs to. It is the property of
Stephanos, cousin of Aleksandar. Stephanos
was the young man spurned by Lucia not long
ago. He claims the ring has been missing for
nerly a month. He also has an alibi for the
time of the murder.

Writing: Lucia was attempting to spell
“Radu,” since she recognized one of the
attackers as a Radu man when she tore his

hood off.

Wine: Wine was found dribbled by the
bloodstains in the Vorloi house. The wine is
brought into the city on Radu ships and is sold
mostly in small inns in the wharf area. Aristo,
the Wine Merchant on Vinter's Lane, also sells
this type of wine. If confronted, he gives the
characters the names of those buyers he can
remember. The names are Heranthes the Cob-
bler (innocent), Goodman Christos (inno-
cent), Akarios the Shipwright (red-haired and
guilty), Theodoric Angulsta (innocent), and
Seraphim the Minstrel (innocent). He says
there are undoubtedly others who also buy the
wine, but he cannot remember.

Rope: The rope was used in the murder. It is a
type of rope used in ships and other heavy lift-
ing situations.

Do not give the information above to the charac-
ters too rapidly. They must discover the meaning
of the clues for themselves. Confirm obvious
information (Is this the type of rope used on
boats?); however, do not tell the characters they
are correct if their questions are vague.

When the characters are at this stage of the



investigation, it is impossible to know where
they will want to go in the city. Do not try to
restrict them. Allow the characters to go where
they wish, within reason. The only place the
characters cannot go is the Duke's castle. Fur-
thermore, except for minor assistance, the
characters cannot get any help from the city
officials. Remember, the characters have no
official title and are conducting the investiga-
tion on their own.

THE CHASE

This encounter occurs as the characters make
their investigations. As they move about, they
are indentified by agents of the Veiled Society.
Following the instructions of the Radu, the
Society prepares an ambush for the characters.
During the encounter, the characters are not
able to get help from the constabulary or sol-
diers. All are currently occupied in preventing
a new riot. If the characters try to get such
help, make it clear that this will be no use.

The PCs may decide to chase their attack-
ers, if these are not killed immediately. It is
important that you know how fast the player
characters can move in a round. During the
chase, if both sides move at the same rate,
there is only a slight chance the pursuer will
catch the pursued. Each third round of the
chase, roll 1d10. On a roll of 1-2, the space
between the two groups closes by one round’s
worth of movement. Keep track of the dis-
tance between the two sides. There are delays
in the encounter that expand the distance and
could allow the NPCs to escape.

Characters may possibly capture the NPCs
before they reach the secret entrance at E (Map
6). If this happens, the characters can still
learn the location of this entrance by ques-
tioning their captive. If all the NPCs are
killed, the characters will find a message on
one of the bodies. The message says, “Be at
the Blue Water Mead Hall tonight.”

Read the following encoutner as the charac-
ters head for the Blue Water Mead Hall.

 

The sounds of shouting and screaming
fade, the scene of pandemonium behind.
The streets are deserted of all sensible peo-
ple. Suddenly, an arrow flashes past. A
hooded man is standing on a side street
and furiously cranks his crossbow for
another shot.

 

 

 

Because of the suddenness of the attack, the
player characters must roll for surprise. If the
party is surprised, the man fires another shot
at the group. He continues to do this until the
characters attack or charge him, He then runs
in the direction shown on Map 6.


 

Crossbowman (1st level fighter): AC 4; Fl; hp
7; Running Speed 90’; #AT 1; D 1-6; Save
Fl; ML7; ALC

A. Arrow Ambush

If the characters run after the man, have the
group roll normally for surprise as they round
the corner. If the characters advance with cau-
tion, they notice three hooded bowmen, one
at each of the positions marked by an “X”.
These men are waiting for the crossbowman to
lead the player characters around the corner.
The bowmen shoot once and flee. They do
not melee with the characters unless forced.
They run in the direction shown on the map.

Bowmen (3): AC 7; Running Speed 90’; F1;
hp 5; #AT 1; D 1-6; Save NM; ML6; ALN

B. Booth

As the last fleeing bowman passes this booth,
he grabs one of the poles, pulling the fabric
down. The booth collapses in a billowing
heap that blocks the path for two rounds. The
vendor stands next to his booth, screaming
curses and angrily trying to stop anyone
around him.

C. Crowd

This street is very busy. People fleeing the area
of the new riot clog the thoroughfare. All
characters (pursued and pursuing) are only
able to move at half their normal Running
Speed while on this street.

D. Cart

This street has a slight incline. At the top of
the incline is a fishmonger’s cart. The fleeing
men stop at this cart and spend one round
pushing it down the slope. The cart moves at
30’ per round. The cart strikes a character on a
die roll of 20. All player characters can be
struck, unless the character takes a specific
action to avoid the cart. Characters struck by
the cart take no damage, but spend two
rounds being knocked down and standing up.
If the characters do not stop the cart, it rolls
into the busy thoroughfare, and plows into
the crowd. Several people are badly injured.

E. Guard

 

Around the corner is a dead end alley. Your
quarry is not there, but there is nowhere
they could have gone. Standing at the far
end of the alley is a huge, half-naked man
holding a two-handed sword.

 

 

 

The man is the guard from Room 6 of the

Chambers of the Veiled Ones. He is guarding
the secret entrance at the end of the alley. If
the characters do not advance or attack the
man, he stands immobile. Otherwise, he
fights to the death. He is mute.

Giant Guard (1) (3rd level fighter): AC 6; MV
40'; F3; hp 19; #AT 1 at +3; D 1-10+3;
Save F3; ML 12; ALC

This is the final encounter. If the players han-
dle the encounter correctly, they learn who
murdered Lucia Vorloi and who is in charge of
the Veiled Society. Less successful play will
only give part of this answer.

There are several ways characters can enter
this encounter. If they have pursued the
ambushers, they may find the secret entrace to
Room 6. If they have captured the orator or
the ambushers, they have information to go to
the Blue Water Mead Hall. Careful observa-
tion here allows them to find the entrance to
the Society’s chambers.

1. The Blue Water Mead Hall

 

The Mead Hall is a bright, clean building.
Inside, several sailors in the center of the
room strike up a rousing but badly off-key
chorus of a sea chanty. One plays a simple
bagpipe at a furious pace. near them, ser-
val men link arms and begin a noisy step-
dance. Their stomps punctuate the ribald
words of the song. There is much clatter of
mugs and talk. The tavern keeper asnd sev-
eral potboys whik through the crowd,
slamming down drinks and catching
thrown coins. near the back are two cur-
tained doorways.

 

 

 

A red-haired man sits near the back of the
room. If the characters have a description of
Akarios, they recognize him. If it is near eve-
ning, the man leaves the room, and goes
through one of the curtained doorways. If the
characters appoach the man, he springs to his
feet and runs for the curtained doorway. He
holds his right arm close to his side.

Akarios: AC 9; MV 40’; HD 1; hp 4; #AT 1; D
1-4; Save NM; ML 6; ALN

If the party catches the man and accuses him
of murdering Lucia, he attempts to bluff. If
the party presents any reasonable proof (true
or not) or threatens torture, make a moral
check for Akarios. If he fails the check, he
talks, saying that the Veiled Society ordered
him to murder Lucia. He tells about the secret
entrance to the chambers from the Mead Hall.

If the party does not catch Akarios, he



escapes behind the curtain.
2. Beyond the Curtain

 

Two men sit on the floor near the curtain,
playing dice. Both look up curiously.
Behind the curtain is a short hallway that
ends in a Dutch door. The top half is open,
showing the street beyond.

 

 

 

If the party asks about Akarios, the men point
to the back door. On the street there is no sign
of him. The men try to prevent the characters
from searching the hallway that hides the
secret passage. One of the men is a cleric who
casts a silence spell to cover any noise of fight-
ing. The other is a fighter who tries to make
his first attack when the characters turn their
backs. After this he fights normally.

Cleric (3rd Ivel): AC 5; MV 30’; C3; hp 14;
#AT 1; D 1-6; Save C3; ML 10; AL C;
Spells light, cure light wounds

Fighter (3rd level): AC 5; MV 40’; F3; hp 17;
#AT 1 at +1; D 1-8 +1; Save F3; ML9; AL
C; potion of invisibility

3. Robing Chamber

 

This chamber is barely large enough for
two people to stand in. On one wall is a
shelf piled with red robes and black leather
hoods. Otherwise, the room is bare.

 

 

 

The doors to this room are designed to prserve
the secrecy of anyone robing in the chamber.
Each door automatically locks when closed
and cannot open again until the other door in
the room is opened and closed. This effective-
ly prevents more than one person or group
from using the room.

4. Sirenflower Passage

 

The passage forks. From one passage comes
the faint smell of incense and a faint glow
of light. The other passage is black.

 

 

 

The dark passage leads to Room 5, the Meet-
ing Chamber. The passage that smells of
incense and shines with light leads to a
sirenflower (see New Monsters). Halfway
down the passage, the first tendrils of the
plant grow on the wall. When the characters
reach the end of the passage, the sirenflower
closes behind them. In the roots of the
sirenflower are a few bones and rusted items.
Searching among these reveals 500 gp and a
potion of diminution.


 

Sirenflower: AC 9; MV Nil; HD 5; hp 24; #AT
0; D 1-4; Save F5; ML 12; ALN

5. Meeting Chamber

If the characters have not made noise from chop-
ping down doors, loud fighting, arguing noisily
amongst themselves, etc. and they are cautious,
read the following description to them.

 

The glow of light and a droning sound
comes from down the passage. Ahead is an
archway shining with a red light.

A large room is gloomily lit by smolder-
ing fires. Standing along the walls of the
room are 20 men, all dressed in red robes
and black hoods. At the far side of the
room is a man wearing a red and gold robe
and a large wooden mask. His face does
not show under the mask. He is speaking
to the crowd in a hollow echoing voice.
Behind him is a large bronze gong.

The masked leader booms, “And now is
our time! The city will lie helpless before
us! The people will side with us. Our ene-
mies can be crushed. The Duke will feel
our power, will hear only our voice. Those
who oppose us are weak, those who betray
us are traitors. We know what to do with
traitors.” Shouts of agreement fill the air.

“Then take him, take the traitor!” he
shouts, and points to one of the robed men.
“He will suffer for disobeying our orders.
The woman should not have been killed!”

At this the other masked men spring
toward the accused, an inarticulate growl
of rage in their throats. His screams of pan-
ic rise above all.

 

 

 

If the characters do nothing but watch, they wit-
ness the horrible death of one of the members of
the Veiled Society. Lawful characters will not suf-
fer an alignment change, however. Unless one
character watches the leader, he is gone when
they look for him again. After the traitor is dead,
the members turn to leave, one at a time, the
secret meeting obviously over. Half the members
leave by the passage to the Blue Water Mead
Hall. The others leave by the secret entrance that
leads to the blind alley.

If the characters act during the confusion,
the Society members attack them. If any
member of the party watches the leader dur-
ing the commotion, he sees the leader slip
behind the gong and disappear.

The traitor slain by the members was the
man who assisted Akarios with the murder of
Lucia. If the characters check his body, they
find nothing of interest.

Searching the room reveals nothing of use
or value.

Veiled Society Members (20): AC 9; MV 40’;
HD 1; hp 4; #AT 1; D 1-4; Save NM; ML
9; ALC

Leader (3rd level magic-user): AC 8; MV 40’;
HD 2; hp 7; #AT 1 at +1; D 1-4+1 Save
M3+1; ML 8; AL C; Spells charm person,
sleep, invisibility; Magic items dagger +1;
ring of protection +1

The leader is Antonito Radu. If captured, he
tries to place the blame for all events on Zweis
Radu.

If the characters did not defeat the guard in
the alley in the previous encounter, he is in
this chamber. He is mute and attacks anyone
he does not recognize. He does not recognize
the player characters. He is slavishly loyal to
the Radu and does not reveal anything about
them willingly.

Giant Guard (3rd level fighter): AC 6; MV
40’; F3; hp 19; #AT 1 at +3; D 1-10 +3;
Save F3; ML 12; ALC

6. Cell

 

The room is unlit and foul-smelling. Straw
crackles underfoot. There is a shuffling of
chains from one cornet.

 

 

 

Held prisoner in this room is Estaish, a mem-
ber of the Duke's Elvengard. He is chained to
the wall. The manacles are locked around his
feet and hands. No key is in sight. He is weak
and has been tortured. He can barely talk.

If rescued, he shows the party all secret
doors out of the room. He comes with the par-
ty, but cannot fight and can only walk with
support. If the characters succeed in getting
him outside, he accompanies the player char-
acters as an NPC on future adventures. There
is no question of his loyalty, although he does
not accept unreasonable orders. He serves the
characters in the best and wisest manner.

He has no equipment with him other than
clothing. His remaining equipment (chain
armor, sword, and bow) is in Room 8.

Estaish learned a great deal about the Veil-
ed Society during his imprisonment. He can
identify the murderer of Lucia Vorloi and
knows the murder was done on the orders of
the Veiled Society. He knows that the Radu
family is involved in the Veiled Society and is
responsible for inciting the riots in the city. If
used as a witness to the Duke concerning the
Radu and the Society, he can destroy the Radu
as a power faction forever.

Estaish (1st level elf): AC 9; MV 20’ due to
weakness; E1; hp 3; #AT 0; D 0; Save E1;
ML 12; ALL; Spells None



7. The Secret Chamber

 

The chamber is brightly lit by hundreds of
sputtering candles that give the room a
warm, yellow glow. In the center of the
room is a table piled with books and
papers. On the floor is an old man. He lies
face down in a small pool of blood. Stand-
ing over him is a middle-aged swarthy man
holding a sword to a younger man’s chest.

The younger man shouts, “Stop him!
He has slain our father! He is a murderer!”

“Get back you fools or die now!” says
the middle-aged man. “I've had enough
meddling and foolishness.” He leaps for-
ward to attack you.

 

 

 

The younger man is Zweis Radu, the middle-
aged man, Cartha Radu. Cartha will attempt
to kill the player characters, then escape. If he
is severely wounded, he attempts to fight his
way past the characters and flee. During this
fight Zweis assists the characters.

If Zweis is still alive after the fight, he
thanks the characters and offers them a
reward. The reward is a position within his
organization — the Veiled Society. If the char-
acters accept, those of Lawful alignment will
change to Chaotic. If the characters refuse,
Zweis tries to bribe them. He offers each char-
acter 500 gp in jewels from a small wooden
box in the desk. If the characters still refuse,
Zweis lets them go and immediately makes
plans to flee the city.

If the characters search this room, they find
3000 gp worth of gems in a small box and
Estaish’s equipment. The dead man on the
floor is Anton Radu.

If the characters try to examine the papers
or take these with them, Zweis attacks. The
papers are a complete account of the Radu
family’s actions and the Veiled Society.

Cartha (6th level fighter): AC 1; MV 40’; F6;
hp 39; #AT lat +4; D 1-8 +2; Save F3 +3;
ML 11; AL C; +4 on all hit rolls due to
magic weapon and high level; ring of pro-
tection +1; sword +2

Zweis (3rd level fighter): AC 3; MV 40’; F3;
hp 21; #AT 1 at +1; D 1-8+1; Save F3;
ML 9; AL C; sword +1

If the papers are placed in the hands of the
Duke or any other family, all members of the
Veiled Society and Radu faction are declared
traitors and sentenced to death.

Not all members of the Veiled Society are
captured. Those that escape learn of the char-
acters’ involvement in the family downfall.
This can be a starting point for adventures as
the Radu faction tries to take revenge on the
player characters.


 

AFTERWARD

After the adventure in Specularum has been
completed, it’s time to step back and decide
what to do next. Are the players happy with
the course of the campaign? Have the charac-
ters advanced beyond the lower levels of play?
Have the players mastered the game at this
levels? Do they want to take a stronger role in
the development of the campaign setting?

If so, they will probably want to try the
D&D® Expert adventures for character levels
4-14, The next adventure recommended for
the party that has completed this series of
adventures and gained 4th level or so is the
ocean voyage to X1, The Isle of Dread. How
the characters begin this adventure will be
decided by how well they did in Specularum.
If their faction won, they will be in a good
position to simply propose the trip to a power-

ful sponsor. If not, they will still have devel-
oped other contacts in the course of their
adventures—Lirdrium Arkayz, Sindar, Arnulf
Armbruster, and perhaps even the Protector.
(And they may need these contacts to leave
Specularum quickly! ).

If the characters are not yet powerful
enough for ocean adventures, and there are
still adventures in this series left unplayed, the
players can be sent back into them. For exam-
ple, if the party caused the fall of the Radu
faction in Specularum, the survivors of that
faction might arrange to have them kid-
napped by slavers (leading to the “Great
Escape” adventure) of spirited away by desert
nomads (bringing them to the “Lost City’).
Likewise, if the player characters’ faction has
lost, they might flee into the woods, and
encounter a village of elves with a problem. . .

If the players enjoyed a certain adventure,
there is no reason not to use the same setting
or NPCs as a springboard for more adven-
tures. For example, the hapless Caldwell
might buy another castle—and have no better
luck than he did the first time! A new adven-
ture can also be created by rekeying existing
maps, changing the location of the complex
and the denizens found there. Such “new”
complexes should remain consistent with the
human, demihuman, and monster popula-
tions for the locale. Recognizable territories
(and even individual tribes) make a campaign
world more real.

Finally, for those wanting even more adven-
tures, GAZ1, The Grand Duchy of Kara-
meikos has suggestions for further adventures,
and future Gazetteers will enable the players
to do even more!

 

 

 

wr

wt

|

Se

oi

 

 




 

LE LE Th OP EEE EY RE 2 SE EERE EET TY OT 1S ES

Archer Bush

Armor Class 7

Hit dice: 2
Move: 3'(1')
Attacks: 1 thorn spray
Damage: 1-4

No. Appearing: 1-20
Save As: Fighter 1
Morale: 12
Treasure Type: IV
Alignment: Chaotic

liding .

A chameleon man cannot attack in the
same round that it uses the vanishing move,
because of the mental concentration required
to vanish. A group of chameleon men will
usually use the vanishing move to surround
opponents.

The warriors of this race are usually armed
with daggers or clubs. They never wear armor,
since they cannot carry much weight while
using the vanishing ability.

Chameleon men usually live in deep
caverns or in dense forests far from civiliza-

Archer bushes have sickly-looking green
leaves, dwarf trunks and thorny brown
branches. The trunk looks like a 3’ tall mound
of leaves. Hidden under the leaves is a huge
mouth. Archer bushes are carnivorous and can
uproot themselves and move slowly towards
their prey. The mouth is filled with extra hard
thorns which the bush uses like teeth to
devour prey once the prey is dead. Archer
bushes attack by shooting a spray of several
small thorns at their victims, causing 1-4
points of damage. Archer bushes can shoot
their thorn spray at one target up to 20 feet
away. Each bush can only fire three such sprays

tion.

Crone of Chaos

Armor Class: 7

Hit Dice: 6*
Move: 120’ (40')
Attacks: 2
Damage: 1-6/1-6
Special Attacks: Magic use
Save As: F6
Morale: 8
Alignment: Chaotic
XP Value: 500

in a day.

Chameleon Man

Armor Class: 9

Hit Dice: 2°
Move: 120' (40')
Attacks: 1 weapon
Damage: By weapon
No. Appearing: 2-8 (5-20)
Save As: F2
Morale: 7,

Treasure Type: (QtS)E
Alignment: Neutral
XP Value: 45

Chameleon men are 7 feet tall and quite thin.
They have spindly arms and legs, and move
with a gangly, awkward stride. Their multi-
colored skin has with tiger-like stripes of red,
blue, green, yellow, brown, orange, black and
white.

Each round, a chameleon man can vanish,
and reappear in another place. It can reappear
up to 120’ from the spot where it vanished.
This vanishing move is instantaneous. The
control of this ability is so precise that they
never reappear in mid-air or inside solid
objects. However, since the use of the ability is
instantaneous, a chameleon man cannot reap-
pear in the exact spot where someone else is
standing when the chameleon man vanishes.
If several chameleon men use this ability in
the same area, they all reappear without col-

The crone of chaos is an intelligent, evil-
natured creature that uses deception to cause
pain and suffering. In its true form, the crone
has wrinkled, leathery skin, sparse hair, long
crooked arms, fangs, and large hands with
claw-like fingers. It normally lives alone in evil
forests or desolate wilderness, often in a cave.

The crone has unusually keen hearing and
eyesight, and is surprised only on a roll of 1 on
d6.

The creature has several magical attacks
available. These are natural powers, not spells
(although they can be revealed by detect mag-
ic and destroyed by dispel magic, a 3rd level
magic-user spell). The most important of the-
se powers is an illusion power that allows the
crone to look like a human or demi-human
character. The crone usually disguises itself as
a beautiful young woman to fool unwary vic-
tims. In this form it uses the animal control
and daggers of sorcery powers to attack. The
crone fights in its true form only if surprised,
or if the other attacks have failed to destroy
the opposition.

The crone’s animal control and daggers of
Sorcery powers ate described more fully in
encounter R2 in The Hall of Rock.

Cynidiceans

Armor Class: 9

Hit Dice: 1

Move: 120' (40')



Attacks: 1
Damage: 1-6

No. Appearing: 1-6

Save As: Fighter: 1
Morale: Special
Treasure Type: A
Alignment: Chaotic

Cynidiceans are a special type of normal
humans who live in the Lost City. They have
pale skin, white hair, large eyes, and infravis-
ion. They wear colorful masks, bright cloth-
ing, and carry short swords. The Cynidicean
have lived underground so long that they have
a —1 to hit when attacking in full sunlight
(like goblins). They spend most of their time
living in strange dream worlds. Special Cyni-
dicean characters can be set up just like nor-
mal NPCs. More details on the Cynidiceans
will be found in the DM’s Background in the
Lost City adventure. A dozen encounters with
Cynidiceans are outlined here. The DM may
use these or make up his or her own.

Cynidicean Encounters

1. One character in a wolf mask (AC 9; NM;
hp 3; MV 40’; #AT none; ML 7; AL C) is
encountered. This Cynidicean believes he
is a werewolf. When he sees the party, he
will drop to all fours, howl, sniff, circle,
and generally behave like a wolf. He may
try to bite if approached too closely. He
thinks he cannot be harmed, and will only
be afraid of magic or silver weapons.

2. Three characters approach the party,
dressed in dark robes and devil masks.
They carry incense burners. These Cynidi-
ceans think they are powerful clerics (AC
5; C3, C2, C1; hp 13, 9, 4; MV 30’; #AT 1;
D 1-6; ML 8; AL C). They see the party as
demons and will try to drive them off with
loud cries and foul-smelling smoke. The
leader's name is Brother Theodeus.

3. One Cynidicean dressed in bright green
robes and a bird mask approaches the party
(AC 9; NM; hp 3; MV 40’; #AT 1; D 1-6;
ML 11; AL C). She will walk slowly up to
one party member, hand him or her a
small pouch, smile, and walk on. She will
not notice any attempt the party makes to
talk to her. The pouch contains a strange
powder that smells like cloves. The powder
has no special properties at all.

4. Six Cynidiceans in striped robes and camel
masks zig-zag slowly down the hall in sin-
gle file. They are trying to avoid the invisi-
ble snakes on the floor. They will try to
show the party the invisible snakes and


 

warn the party to walk around the snakes.
There are, of course, no snakes.

. This party of four wear insect masks, carry
large clay jars, and hum like bees. They
will stop and ask the party to drink from
the jars. Everyone who does has 1-4 points
of damage cured, as these jars contain hon-
ey from the lair of killer bees. If the Cyni-
diceans are attacked, or if someone tries to
drink twice the Cynidiceans will smash the
jars and attack berserkly (AC 9; NM; hp 3
each; MV 40’; #AT 1 at +2; D 1-6; ML 12;
AL C).

. This party of four wears animal masks;
Hawk, Fish, Cat, and Fox (these are also
the characters’ names). They are carrying a
stretcher with a gourd on it. These charac-
ters are rushing their ‘sick friend’ (the
gourd: Dog) to a cleric. If the party has a
cleric, the Cynidiceans will insist that the
cleric cure their friend.

. This group of six in bright yellow robes and
human masks will stop and stare at the par-
ty. They will ‘recognize’ a party member as
the King or Queen of Cynidicea. They will
follow the character, sing songs of praise,
and wait on the character hand and foot.
In general, they will smother the character
with attention. However, they will not
fight for their King or Queen. They are
more likely to grab the character and try to
rush him or her to safety. They are: AC 9;
NM; hp 4 each; MV 40’; #AT 1; D 1-6; ML
7; ALC. Their spokesman is Policrates the
Herald.

. A group of four Cynidiceans in feathered
robes and bird masks approach. On secing
the party, the Cynidiceans will ‘fly’ (run)
forward, flapping their arms and squawk-
ing. They will invite the party to fly along
and will lead them on a merry chase
through the pyramid. If the party refuses
to join the Cynidiceans, the Cynidiceans
will insult the party as poor creatures who
cannot fly (‘Thou land-bound slugs!”’),
circle three times, and ‘fly’ away. If
attacked, the Cynidiceans (AC 9; NM; hp
4; MV 40’; Save: F1) will ‘fly’ away.

. A group of six Cynidiceans with their
bodies painted black and wearing vulture
masks walk quietly toward the party. They
carry long wooden boards, but seem
friendly and normal. They will follow the
party, waiting for something to be killed.
When it is, they will rush over and start
building a coffin to fit the body. When
they are done, they will demand a 10 gp

payment. They will attack if they are not
paid. (AC 9; NM; hp 4 each; MV 40’; #AT
1; D 1-6; ML 8; AL C).

10. These five Cynidiceans are a NPC Party.
They will think the player characters are
some kind of monster. Turn to the Wander-
ing Monster: Level 2 table in the D&D
Basic rules and roll for the type of monster
the Cynidiceans think the player characters
are. The Cynidicean party has:

F3 (AC 5; hp 14; MV 20’; #AT +1 at 1; D
8+1; Save F3; ML 8;)

F2 (AC 5; hp 10; MV 20’; #AT 1; D 1-8; Save
F2; ML 8; AL C)

F2 (AC 5; hp 8; MV 20’; #AT 1; D 1-8; Save
F2; ML 8; AL C)

M2 (AC 9; hp 6; MV 40’; #AT 1 or spells; D
1-4; Save M2; ML 8; AL C) Spells: hold
portal, magic missile

C2 (AC 5; hp 8; MV 20’; #AT 1; D 1-6; Save
C2; ML 8; AL C) Spell: cure light wounds

11.This group of five Cynidiceans is dressed in
brightly colored robes and masks with
human faces. They will think the party is
the same band of barbarian raiders who
looted the city centuries ago. They will flee
in panic as the party approaches.

12.The party encounters a Priest of Zargon
(AC 5; C3; hp 12; MV 20’; #AT 1; D 1-6;
Save C3; ML 8; AL C) Spell: cure light
wounds x2). He has twelve followers (AC
9; Fl; hp 4 each; MV 40’; #AT 1; D 1-8;
Save F1; ML 12; AL C). They are on a holy
quest and will insist the party come along.
(The priest will try to trick the party and
take them prisoner.)

Decapus

Armor Class: 5

Hit Dice 4

Move: 90’ (30') in trees or
3 (1) on ground

Attacks: 9 tentacles

Damage: 1-6 each

No. Appearing: 1

Save As: Fighter 2

Morale: 9

Treasure Type: Cc

Alignment: Chaotic

The decapus is a creature usually found in for-
ests. It looks like a bloated hairy globe sprout-
ing ten tentacles. The hair is usually brown,
but sometimes it is black. The body is normal-
ly green, although some purple or yellow
decapuses have been found. In the center of
the decapus’s 4’ wide body is its mouth. The
mouth of a decapus is terrible to behold. It is



very wide and has long yellow teeth and a hor-
rible foul breath.

Decapuses usually live alone, preferring to
hunt by themselves. They hunt by swinging
through trees and scooping up their prey in
their tentacles. The tentacles are 10’ long and
extend from all parts of their bodies. The ten-
tacles are covered with suckers that the deca-
pus can use not only to grasp prey but to climb
walls and ceilings.

The decapus attacks with nine of its tenta-
cles, using the tenth tentacle to hang from the
ceiling (or trees).

On the floor or ground, the decapus is
much more helpless. Its tentacles are not
strong enough to support its weight upright
for long periods of time. On the ground, the
decapus can only manage six attacks, and the-
se attacks do only half normal damage. When
swinging from tree limbs, the decapus can tra-
vel at 90’ per turn, or 30’ per round. On the
ground, the decapus can only move 3’ per
turn or 1’ per round,

Fey, Wailing

Armor Class: 3

Hit Dice: 5”

Move: 150’ (50’
Attacks: special wail
Damage: 1-4/round
No. Appearing: 1(1)

Save As: Fighter: 5
Morale: 12
‘Treasure Type: Cc
Alignment: Neutral

Wailing feys are pale ghost-like figures. Their
shape is roughly humanoid, though longer
and thinner than most humans. They have
glowing red eyes and a large, dark mouth.
Wailing feys are supernatural creatures that
haunt certain families. They warn the family
that one of its members will soon die. Wailing
feys may also mourn for a person after his or
her death. Thus, they may be found guarding
graves, catacombs, or tombs.

Wailing feys can only be hurt by magic or
magical weapons. They are immune to sleep,
charm, and hold spells. They are not undead,
and cannot be turned. Disturbed wailing feys
attack with a special wail. All those within 30’
of the wailing fey take 1-4 points of damage
each round automatically. Doors or walls will
block the sound. A wailing fey will attack any
living creature it sees. It will continue to wail
until it is destroyed or until the intruders have
run away.


 

Golem, Bone

Armor Class: 2

Hit Dice: 8**
Move: 120' (40')
Attacks: 4
Damage: each arm by weapon
No. Appearing: 1

Save As: F4
Morale: 12
Treasure Type: Nil
Alignment: N

XP Value: 1750

A golem is a powerful monster, created and
animated by a high level magic-user or cleric.
The bone golem is made of bones, bound
together in a man-like form. It has four skele-
tal arms, with which it wields four one-
handed weapons or two pole arms. It attacks
up to two opponents each round.

Bone golems can only be hit by magical
weapons. They are immune to sleep, charm,
and hold spells, as well as all gases, fire, cold,
and electrical attacks. They cannot be turned.

Haunt

Armor Class: Special
Hit Dice: Special
Move: Nil
Attacks: Special
Damage: Nil
No. Appearing: 1-2.
Save As: Special
Morale: Nil
Treasure Type: Nil
Alignment: Any
XP Value: 100 when laid to rest

A haunt is a ghost-like spirit of a dead charac-
ter or creature, There is some reason why the
spirit cannot rest, usually a message to be
delivered to those who enter the haunted
area. The haunt cannot be destroyed, only
laid to rest by some means decided by the
DM.

Haunts cannot attack or cause damage,
though certain haunts may require characters
to make a saving throw vs. spells or run away.
Characters who fail their saving throws will
not willingly go into the haunted area again.
A haunt always stays in one area.

Lizard, Lava

Armor Class: 3

Hit Dice: 4*
Move: 90' (30')
Attacks: 1 bite
Damage: 2-12

No. Appearing: 1

Save As: Fighter 4
Morale: 12
Treasure Type: Nil
Alignment: Neutral

The lava lizard is a bizarre reptile that dwells
in subterranean caverns among pools of bub-
bling lava. The creatute has a rocklike outer
shell that helps to maintain the high body
temperature a lava lizard must have to sur-
vive.

The lava lizard fights by trying to bite a
creature with its quick but relatively weak
jaws. A bitten creature takes 1-6 points of
damage from the lizard’s bite and must save
vs. dragon breath. If unsuccessful, the crea-
ture is gripped momentarily by the lava liz-
ard’s jaws and takes an additional 1-6 points
of damage from heat. (For magical types of
fire resistance such as rings and spells, treat
the bite as red dragon breath in terms of sav-
ing throws and reduced damage).

The lava lizard has a special defense as well.
‘Whenever the creature is struck by a nonmagi-
cal metal weapon (such as a sword blade or
dagger), the owning character must save vs.
magic wands or the weapon melts from the
intense heat of the creature's interior. Note
that a melted weapon still inflicts damage on
that round, but not thereafter.

Although these creatures dwell in hot sub-
terranean caverns, they have been known to
travel several miles from the lava they need to
survive. As they feel their body temperature
cooling, they will attempt to return to the
nourishing fires. There are a few unconfirmed
reports of lava lizards being found in sta-
tuelike immobility, presumably having been
caught too far from their source of heat.

Lycanthrope, Werefox

Armor Class: 6 (9)

Hit Dice: 342"
Move: 180' (60')
Attacks: 1 + charm
Damage: 1-6

No. Appearing: 1-4 (1-6)
Save As: Fighter: 3
Morale: 8

Treasure Type: Cc
Alignment: Neutral

Werefoxes are foxes that can change into
human form. In human form, the werefox
will have fox-like red hair and an Armor Class
of 9. A werefox in human form has the ability
to charm a person of the opposite sex. This
ability works like a charm person spell, but



lasts only one day. In fox form, the werefox
can charm animals. The werefox can charm
any one normal or giant animal for one day. A
creature or person who saves vs. Spell will not
be charmed.

Once a creature or person is charmed, it will
remain charmed for that day, even if the were-
fox changes form. The charm ability can be
used only three times per day. For example, a
werefox could try to charm two humans and
one animal in the same day.

Werefoxes are clever and cunning. They live
mainly by their wits. If combat is going
against them they will prefer to trick or bribe
their opponent rather than fight to the death.

Piranha Bird

Armor Class: 6

Hit Dice: 1/2 (1-4 hit points)

Move: 30' (10') on ground
180’ (60’) in flight

Attacks: 1 bite

Damage: 1-4

No. Appearing: 4-24

Save As: Normal Man

Treasure Type: Nil

Alignment: Neutral

The piranha bird is a one-foot long, garishly
colored bird always hungry for fresh meat.
Individual piranha birds may have green,
blue, red, brown, black, or even purple
feathers—the entire variety of colors displayed
in a single flock. Their beaks are sharp and
pointed, and have razorlike edges so that the
bird can stick its beak into the flesh of a crea-
ture, bite, and fly away with a snack.

Piranha birds can fly with humming-
birdlike maneuverability; they can make sud-
den changes in direction, or even hover in the
air. When one piranha bird catches sight of a
potential meal, it utters a high-pitched whis-
tle, thus alerting the entire flock. They always
attack warm-blooded creatures, and do not
have to check morale until half of the flock has
been eliminated.

They do not like bright sunlight, but
piranha birds may be found in all climates
except the very coldest or those barren of any
shade. They prefer to live in regions of dense
forest or in underground caverns, and seem to
have developed limited infravision that allows
them to detect prey up to 30 feet away even in
total darkness.


Armor Class: 9

Hit Dice: 10*
Move: 60’ (20')
Attacks: 2
Damage: 1-6/1-6/1-6
No. Appearing: 1-2 (1-3)
Morale: 10

Save As: Fighter: 5
Treasure Type: B
Alignment: Chaotic

The polymar is a semi-intelligent creature that
can change its shape. It can look like any crea-
ture with 10 hit dice or less, or any object no
larger than 100 cubic feet (10’* 10'* 1’, for
example). The polymar gains no special abili-
ties by changing.

This change ability is physical, not magical.
Thus a detect magic spell will not detect the
polymar. The change, however, is not perfect.
Characters, including NPCs, have the same
chance to detect the polymar as they do to find
secret doors. Thus, elves are more likely to
notice polymars than other character classes. If
the polymar is not detected before it attacks, it
will attack with surprise.

Sirenflower

Armor Class: 9

Hit Dice: 5
Move: 0
Attacks: 0
Damage: Special
No. Appearing: 1-2(1-6)
Save As: Fighter 5
Morale: 12
Treasure Type: ¥.
Alignment: N

XP Value: 175

The sirenflower is a large carnivorous fungus
that has developed the disguise of a normal-
looking plant. It captures its prey by luring
creatures toward its center. To do this, the
plant emits scents and lights. The scents are
similar to those near the plant, particularly
fragrant flowers or rotting meats. The light is a
pale glowing, no brighter than a candle at its
best

Once a creature reaches the center of the
plant, a web of branching arms close in, trap-
ping the creature and slowly crushing it. The-
se branches squeeze with great force, causing
1-4 points of damage per round. In addition,
the branches also ooze an enzyme that dis-
solves flesh. This is very slow-acting and only
does 1-10 points of damage each turn (not
round). Creatures trapped by the sirenflower

can still fight but have a —4 penalty on all hit
rolls.

When the sirenflower reaches 0 hit points,
it is not dead, but all the branches have been
chopped away. The only way to totally kill a
sirenflower is to dig up and burn the root. The
creature grows back at the same rate as a nor-
mal plant.

Steam Weevil

Armor Class: i

Hit Dice: 4
Move: 60'(20')
Attacks: 1 swarm
Damage: 4

No. Appearing: 1 swarm
Save As: Normal Man
Morale: 11
‘Treasure: Nil
Alignment: Neutral

Steam weevils are tiny flying insects that
thrive on the intense heat and pressure of sub-
terranean areas of geothermal activity. They
have developed a way to turn the heat of a
pool of lava directly into usable energy (much
the way plants derive energy directly from the
sun), and many generations of steam weevils
will live their lives without ever leaving the
deep caverns that are their preferred environ-
ment.

Occasionally, however, because of volcanic
activity, a swarm of steam weevils may be car-
tied to the outside world in a blast of steam or
lava. They cannot live long in the relative cold
of the atmosphere, but they can be a danger-
ous enemy in the 1-4 hours that passes before
they die.

Steam weevils glow underground or in
shade, because of the intense heat of their
bodies. A person caught in the midst of a
steam weevil swarm takes four points of dam-
age from burns if the swarm is at full strength.
Damage is cut in half if the character is ward-
ing the insects away. (See “Insect Swarms” in
the monster section of the Basic rules book).
Smoke and fire does not bother steam weevils,
but water damages them if it is splashed on
the swarm (roll to hit AC7.) Characters may
scoop water from a puddle or stream with
their hands, or they may uncover a water con-
tainer and attempt to douse the bugs that way.

For each hit to the swarm, the damage that
the steam weevils can inflict is reduced by one.
Therefore, if two splashes have hit the swarm
and it is surrounding a person who is warding
them off, the swarm does only one point of
damage. Note that the swarm can only attack
one creature or character at a time.



NEW MONSTERS

Vampire Roses

Armor Class: 7

Hit Dice: 4
Movement: 30' (10')
Attacks: 1 + blood drain
Damage: 1-8

No. Appearing: 1-8

Save As: Fighter 2
Morale: 12
Treasure Type: Nil
Alignment: Chaotic

Vampire roses look like normal white rose
bushes. They can, however, uproot them-
selves to move about slowly. Each 4 HD worth
of vampire roses represents a single rose bush.
The thorny stalks of vampire roses can whip
around a victim, inflicting 1-8 points of dam-
age. The thorns are hollow. Once a thorn stalk
has stuck and wrapped around a victim, the
vampire rose will drain 1-8 points of blood per
round automatically. The vampire rose also
injects a hypnotic anesthetic into the victim’s
bloodstream, the victim must save vs. Spells
or lose all willpower, allowing the vampire
fose to continue sucking blood until the vic-
tim dies. After a vampire rose has completely
drained a victim, the roses will be colored
blood red instead of white for one day.

Water Weird

Armor Class: 5

Hit Dice: 3

Move: 60’ // (20')
Attacks: 1
Damage: 1 +drowning
No. Appearing: 1-2

Save As: F6

Morale: 12

‘Treasure Type: 1
Alignment: Chaotic

XP Value: 35

Water weird are magical creatures made of
water that live in bodies of water, such as
pools. They attack all living things that dis-
turb them, feeding on their life forces in some
unknown way. Water weirds appear in nearly
any shape, though the form of a giant snake is
common,

In combat, weirds attack single enemies
within 10 feet of their pool. They form from
the water in 2 melee rounds. Instead of mak-
ing a normal attack, water weirds make their
victims make a saving throw vs. paralyzation
(Dexterity bonuses apply). Victims who fail
their saving throw take damage, and are
seized and dragged into the water. When
weitds trap and drag a victim under water,


 

they ignore other opponents until the trapped
victim is dead. A trapped character can attack
the weird with a —4 penalty to hit. Once in
the water, victims take damage each round
and must make a saving throw vs. death each
round or go unconscious. Unconscious victims
die after 3 rounds unless rescued.

Sharp weapons cause only 1 point of dam-
age; blunt weapons cause normal damage. All
strength and magical bonuses apply. Damage
equal to a weird’s total hit points disrupts it,
but it reforms in 2 melee rounds. Cold slows
weirds (half movement and attacks every sec-
ond round), but fire-based spells do half or
none of their normal damage. Purify food and
water spells kill water weirds immediately. All
other attacks do not harm them. They may
retreat to the bottoms or far corners of their
pools if hard pressed.

Larger water weirds are possible. For every
additional 3 hit dice, the weird’s AC is
improved by 2, damage increased by 1, attack
range in increased by 5 feet, and saving throws
and trapped victims’ attacks made with addi-
tional penalties of —2.

Witch-Sisters, Three

The three sisters are unlike any other magic-
users, in that their powers work in combina-
tion, and require the Black Opal Eye as a
focus. Individually, they are weak, but togeth-
er they become stronger. Use the higher levels
and hit points listed for each only when the
witches are together in one place and when
they know where the Black Opal Eye is. If the
sisters are separated, or if one of them dies, or
if they do not know where the Black Opal Eye
is, do not use their higher spells and hit
points.

The Black Opal Eye also enables the witches
to communicate te
